
MR. CRAWLEY'S LETTER TO THE DEAN.


[Illustration]

Mr. Crawley, when he got home after his walk to Silverbridge, denied
that he was at all tired. "The man at Silverbridge, whom I went to
see administered refreshment to me;--nay, he administered it with
salutary violence," he said, affecting even to laugh. "And I am
bound to speak well of him on behalf of mercies over and beyond that
exhibited by the persistent tender of some wine. That I should find
him judicious I had expected. What little I have known of him taught
me so to think of him. But I found with him also a softness of heart
for which I had not looked."

"And you will not give up the living, Josiah?"

"Most certainly I will. A duty, when it is clear before a man, should
never be made less so by any tenderness in others." He was still
thinking of Giles Hoggett. "It's dogged as does it." The poor woman
could not answer him. She knew well that it was vain to argue with
him. She could only hope that in the event of his being acquitted
at the trial, the dean, whose friendship she did not doubt, might
re-endow him with the small benefice which was their only source of
bread.

On the following morning there came by post a short note from Dr.
Tempest. "My dear Mr. Crawley," the note ran,


   I implore you, if there be yet time, to do nothing rashly.
   And even although you should have written to the bishop or
   to the dean, your letters need have no effect, if you will
   allow me to make them inoperative. Permit me to say that
   I am a man much older than you, and one who has mixed much
   both with clergymen and with the world at large. I tell
   you with absolute confidence, that it is not your duty in
   your present position to give up your living. Should your
   conduct ever be called in question on this matter you will
   be at perfect liberty to say that you were guided by my
   advice. You should take no step till after the trial.
   Then, if the verdict be against you, you should submit to
   the bishop's judgment. If the verdict be in your favour,
   the bishop's interference will be over.

   And you must remember that if it is not your duty as a
   clergyman to give up your living, you can have no right,
   seeing that you have a wife and family, to throw it away
   as an indulgence to your pride. Consult any other friend
   you please;--Mr. Robarts, or the dean himself. I am
   quite sure that any friend who knows as many of the
   circumstances as I know will advise you to hold the
   living, at any rate till after the trial. You can refer
   any such friend to me.

   Believe me to be, yours very truly,

   MORTIMER TEMPEST.


Mr. Crawley walked about again with this letter in his pocket, but
on this occasion he did not go in the direction of Hoggle End. From
Hoggle End he could hardly hope to pick up further lessons of wisdom.
What could any Giles Hoggett say to him beyond what he had said to
him already? If he were to read the doctor's letter to Hoggett, and
to succeed in making Hoggett understand it all, Hoggett could only
caution him to be dogged. But it seemed to him that Hoggett and his
new friend at Silverbridge did not agree in their doctrines, and it
might be well that he should endeavour to find out which of them had
most of justice on his side. He was quite sure that Hoggett would
advise him to adhere to his project of giving up the living,--if only
Hoggett could be made to understand the circumstances.

He had written, but had not as yet sent away his letter to the dean.

His letter to the bishop would be but a note, and he had postponed
the writing of that till the other should be copied and made
complete.

He had sat up late into the night composing and altering his letter
to his old friend, and now that the composition was finished he was
loth to throw it away. Early in this morning, before the postman had
brought to him Dr. Tempest's urgent remonstrance, he had shown to his
wife the draught of his letter to the dean. "I cannot say that it is
not true," she had said.

"It is certainly true."

"But I wish, dear, you would not send it. Why should you take any
step till the trial be over?"

"I shall assuredly send it," he had replied. "If you will peruse it
again, you will see that the epistle would be futile were it kept
till I shall have been proved to be a thief."

"Oh, Josiah, such words kill me."

"They are not pleasant, but it will be well that you should become
used to them. As for the letter, I have taken some trouble to express
myself with perspicuity, and I trust that I may have succeeded." At
that time Hoggett was altogether in the ascendant; but now, as he
started on his walk, his mind was somewhat perturbed by the contrary
advice of one, who after all, might be as wise as Hoggett. There
would be nothing dogged in the conduct recommended to him by Dr.
Tempest. Were he to follow the doctor's advice, he would be trimming
his sails, so as to catch any slant of a breeze that might be
favourable to him. There could be no doggedness in a character that
would submit to such trimming.

The postman came to Hogglestock but once in a day, so that he could
not despatch his letter till the next morning,--unless, indeed, he
chose to send it a distance of four miles to the nearest post-office.
As there was nothing to justify this, there was another night for
the copying of his letter,--should he at last determine to send
it. He had declared to Dr. Tempest that he would send it. He had
sworn to his wife that it should go. He had taken much trouble with
it. He believed in Hoggett. But, nevertheless, this incumbency of
Hogglestock was his all in the world. It might be that he could still
hold it, and have bread at least for his wife to eat. Dr. Tempest had
told him that he would be probably acquitted. Dr. Tempest knew as
much of all the circumstances as did he himself, and had told him
that he was not guilty. After all Dr. Tempest knew more about it than
Hoggett knew.

If he resigned the living, what would become of him,--of him,--of him
and of his wife? Whither would they first go when they turned their
back upon the door inside which there had at any rate been shelter
for them for many years? He calculated everything that he had, and
found that at the end of April, even when he should have received his
rent-charge, there would not be five pounds in hand among them. As
for his furniture, he still owed enough to make it impossible that he
should get anything out of that. And these thoughts all had reference
to his position if he should be acquitted. What would become of his
wife if he should be convicted? And as for himself, whither should he
go when he came out of prison?

He had completely realized the idea that Hoggett's counsel was
opposed to that given to him by Dr. Tempest; but then it might
certainly be the case that Hoggett had not known all the facts. A man
should, no doubt, be dogged when the evils of life are insuperable;
but need he be so when the evils can be overcome? Would not Hoggett
himself undergo any treatment which he believed to be specific for
rheumatism? Yes; Hoggett would undergo any treatment that was not in
itself opposed to his duty. The best treatment for rheumatism might
be to stay away from the brick-field on a rainy day; but if so,
there would be no money to keep the pot boiling, and Hoggett would
certainly go to the brick-field, rheumatism and all, as long as his
limbs would carry him there. Yes; he would send his letter. It was
his duty, and he would do it. Men looked askance at him, and pointed
at him as a thief. He would send the letter, in spite of Dr. Tempest.
Let justice be done, though the heaven may fall.

He had heard of Lady Lufton's offer to his wife. The offers of the
Lady Luftons of the world had been sorely distressing to his spirit,
since it had first come to pass that such offers had reached him in
consequence of his poverty. But now there was something almost of
relief to him in the thought that the Lady Luftons would, after some
fashion, save his wife and children from starvation;--would save his
wife from the poorhouse, and enable his children to have a start in
the world. For one of his children a brilliant marriage might be
provided,--if only he himself were out of the way. How could he take
himself out of the way? It had been whispered to him that he might be
imprisoned for two months,--or for two years. Would it not be a grand
thing if the judge would condemn him to be imprisoned for life? Was
there ever a man whose existence was so purposeless, so useless, so
deleterious, as his own? And yet he knew Hebrew well, whereas the
dean knew but very little Hebrew. He could make Greek iambics, and
doubted whether the bishop knew the difference between an iambus
and a trochee. He could disport himself with trigonometry, feeling
confident that Dr. Tempest had forgotten his way over the asses'
bridge. He knew "Lycidas" by heart; and as for Thumble, he felt
quite sure that Thumble was incompetent of understanding a single
allusion in that divine poem. Nevertheless, though all this wealth of
acquirement was his, it would be better for himself, better for those
who belonged to him, better for the world at large, that he should be
put an end to. A sentence of penal servitude for life, without any
trial, would be of all things the most desirable. Then there would be
ample room for the practice of that virtue which Hoggett had taught
him.

When he returned home the Hoggethan doctrine prevailed, and he
prepared to copy his letter. But before he commenced his task, he
sat down with his youngest daughter, and read,--or made her read
to him,--a passage out of a Greek poem, in which are described the
troubles and agonies of a blind giant. No giant would have been
more powerful,--only that he was blind, and could not see to avenge
himself on those who had injured him. "The same story is always
coming up," he said, stopping the girl in her reading. "We have it in
various versions, because it is so true to life.

   Ask for this great deliverer now, and find him
   Eyeless in Gaza, at the mill with slaves.

It is the same story. Great power reduced to impotence, great glory
to misery, by the hand of Fate,--Necessity, as the Greeks called
her; the goddess that will not be shunned! At the mill with slaves!
People, when they read it, do not appreciate the horror of the
picture. Go on, my dear. It may be a question whether Polyphemus
had mind enough to suffer; but, from the description of his power,
I should think that he had. 'At the mill with slaves!' Can any
picture be more dreadful than that? Go on, my dear. Of course you
remember Milton's Samson Agonistes. Agonistes indeed!" His wife was
sitting stitching at the other side of the room; but she heard his
words,--heard and understood them; and before Jane could again get
herself into the swing of the Greek verse, she was over at her
husband's side, with her arms round his neck. "My love!" she said.
"My love!"

He turned to her, and smiled as he spoke to her. "These are old
thoughts with me. Polyphemus and Belisarius, and Samson and Milton,
have always been pets of mine. The mind of the strong blind creature
must be so sensible of the injury that has been done to him! The
impotency, combined with his strength, or rather the impotency
with the memory of former strength and former aspirations, is so
essentially tragic!"

She looked into his eyes as he spoke, and there was something of
the flash of old days, when the world was young to them, and when
he would tell her of his hopes, and repeat to her long passages
of poetry, and would criticize for her advantage the works of old
writers. "Thank God," she said, "that you are not blind. It may yet
be all right with you."

"Yes,--it may be," he said.

"And you shall not be at the mill with slaves."

"Or, at any rate, not eyeless in Gaza, if the Lord is good to me.
Come, Jane, we will go on." Then he took up the passage himself, and
read it on with clear, sonorous voice, every now and then explaining
some passage or expressing his own ideas upon it, as though he were
really happy with his poetry.

It was late in the evening before he got out his small stock of best
letter-paper, and sat down to work at his letter. He first addressed
himself to the bishop; and what he wrote to the bishop was as
follows:--


   Hogglestock Parsonage, April llth, 186--.

   MY LORD BISHOP,

   I have been in communication with Dr. Tempest, of
   Silverbridge, from whom I have learned that your lordship
   has been pleased to appoint a commission of inquiry,--of
   which commission he is the chairman,--with reference to
   the proceedings which it may be necessary that you should
   take, as bishop of this diocese, after my forthcoming
   trial at the approaching Barchester assizes. My lord, I
   think it right to inform you, partly with a view to the
   comfort of the gentlemen named on that commission, and
   partly with the purport of giving you that information
   which I think that a bishop should possess in regard to
   the clerical affairs of his own diocese, that I have by
   this post resigned my preferment at Hogglestock into the
   hands of the Dean of Barchester, by whom it was given
   to me. In these circumstances, it will, I suppose, be
   unnecessary for you to continue the commission which you
   have set in force; but as to that, your lordship will, of
   course, be the only judge.

   I have the honour to be, my Lord Bishop,
   Your most obedient and very humble servant,

   JOSIAH CRAWLEY,
   Perpetual Curate of Hogglestock

   The Right Reverend
   The Bishop of Barchester,
   &c. &c. &c.
   The Palace, Barchester.


But the letter which was of real importance,--which was intended to
say something,--was that to the dean, and that also shall be given to
the reader. Mr. Crawley had been for a while in doubt how he should
address his old friend in commencing this letter, understanding that
its tone throughout must, in a great degree, be made conformable with
its first words. He would fain, in his pride, have begun "Sir." The
question was between that and "My dear Arabin." It had once between
them always been "Dear Frank" and "Dear Joe;" but the occasions for
"Dear Frank" and "Dear Joe" between them had long been past. Crawley
would have been very angry had he now been called Joe by the dean,
and would have bitten his tongue out before he would have called the
dean Frank. His better nature, however, now prevailed, and he began
his letter, and completed it as follows:--


   MY DEAR ARABIN,

   Circumstances, of which you have probably heard something,
   compel me to write to you, as I fear, at some length. I am
   sorry that the trouble of such a letter should be forced
   upon you during your holidays;--

Mr. Crawley, as he wrote this, did not forget to remind himself that
he never had any holidays;

   --but I think you will admit, if you will bear with me to
   the end, that I have no alternative.

   I have been accused of stealing a cheque for twenty
   pounds, which cheque was drawn by my Lord Lufton on his
   London bankers, and was lost out of his pocket by Mr.
   Soames, his lordship's agent, and was so lost, as Mr.
   Soames states,--not with an absolute assertion,--during a
   visit which he made to my parsonage here at Hogglestock.
   Of the fact that I paid the cheque to a tradesman in
   Silverbridge there is no doubt. When questioned about it,
   I first gave an answer which was so manifestly incorrect
   that it has seemed odd to me that I should not have had
   credit for a mistake from those who must have seen that
   detection was so evident. The blunder was undoubtedly
   stupid, and it now bears heavy on me. I then, as I have
   learned, made another error,--of which I am aware that you
   have been informed. I said that the cheque had come to me
   from you, and in saying so, I thought that it had formed
   a portion of that alms which your open-handed benevolence
   bestowed upon me when I attended on you, not long before
   your departure, in your library. I have striven to
   remember the facts. It may be,--nay, it probably is the
   case,--that such struggles to catch some accurate glimpse
   of bygone things do not trouble you. Your mind is, no
   doubt, clearer and stronger than mine, having been kept
   to its proper tune by greater and fitter work. With me,
   memory is all but gone, and the power of thinking is on
   the wane! I struggled to remember, and I thought that
   the cheque had been in the envelope which you handed to
   me,--and I said so. I have since learned, from tidings
   received, as I am told, direct from yourself, that I was
   as wrong in the second statement as I had been in the
   first. The double blunder has, of course, been very heavy
   on me.

   I was taken before the magistrates at Silverbridge, and
   was by them committed to stand my trial at the assizes to
   be holden in Barchester on the 28th of this month. Without
   doubt, the magistrates had no alternative but to commit
   me, and I am indebted to them that they have allowed me my
   present liberty upon bail. That my sufferings in all this
   should have been grievous, you will understand. But on
   that head I should not touch, were it not that I am bound
   to explain to you that my troubles in reference to this
   parish of Hogglestock, to which I was appointed by you,
   have not been the slightest of those sufferings. I felt at
   first, believing then that the world around me would think
   it unlikely that such a one as I had wilfully stolen a sum
   of money, that it was my duty to maintain myself in my
   church. I did so maintain myself against an attack made
   upon me by the bishop, who sent over to Hogglestock one
   Mr. Thumble, a gentleman doubtless in holy orders, though
   I know nothing and can learn nothing of the place of his
   cure, to dispossess me of my pulpit and to remove me from
   my ministrations among my people. To Mr. Thumble I turned
   a deaf ear, and would not let him so much as open his
   mouth inside the porch of my church. Up to this time I
   myself have read the services, and have preached to the
   people, and have continued, as best I could, my visits to
   the poor and my labours in the school, though I know,--no
   one knows as well,--how unfitted I am for such work by the
   grief which has fallen upon me.

   Then the bishop sent for me, and I thought it becoming on
   my part to go to him. I presented myself to his lordship
   at his palace, and was minded to be much governed in my
   conduct by what he might say to me, remembering that I am
   bound to respect the office, even though I may not approve
   the man; and I humbled myself before his lordship, waiting
   patiently for any directions which he in his discretion
   might think it proper to bestow on me. But there arose up
   between us that very pestilent woman, his wife,--to his
   dismay, seemingly, as much as to mine,--and she would
   let there be place for no speech but her own. If there
   be aught clear to me in ecclesiastical matters, it is
   this,--that no authority can be delegated to a female. The
   special laws of this and of some other countries do allow
   that women shall sit upon the temporal thrones of the
   earth, but on the lowest step of the throne of the Church
   no woman has been allowed to sit as bearing authority,
   the romantic tale of the woman Pope notwithstanding.
   Thereupon, I left the palace in wrath, feeling myself
   aggrieved that a woman should have attempted to dictate
   to me, and finding it hopeless to get a clear instruction
   from his lordship,--the woman taking up the word whenever
   I put a question to my lord the bishop. Nothing,
   therefore, came of that interview but fruitless labour to
   myself, and anger, of which I have since been ashamed.

   Since that time I have continued in my parish,--working,
   not without zeal, though in truth, almost without
   hope,--and learning even from day to day that the opinions
   of men around me have declared me to be guilty of the
   crime imputed to me. And now the bishop has issued a
   commission as preparatory to proceeding against me under
   the Act for the punishment of clerical offences. In doing
   this, I cannot say that the bishop has been ill-advised,
   even though the advice may have come from that
   evil-tongued lady, his wife. And I hold that a woman may
   be called on for advice, with most salutary effect, in
   affairs as to which any show of female authority would be
   equally false and pernicious. With me it has ever been so,
   and I have had a counsellor by me as wise as she has been
   devoted.

It must be noticed that in the draught copy of his letter which Mr.
Crawley gave to his wife to read this last sentence was not inserted.
Intending that she should read his letter, he omitted it till he made
the fair copy.

   Over this commission his lordship has appointed Dr.
   Tempest of Silverbridge to preside, and with him I have
   been in communication. I trust that the labours of the
   gentlemen of whom it is composed may be brought to a
   speedy close; and, having regard to their trouble, which
   in such a matter is, I fear, left without remuneration, I
   have informed Dr. Tempest that I should write this letter
   to you with the intent and assured purpose of resigning
   the perpetual curacy of Hogglestock into your hands.

   You will be good enough, therefore, to understand that
   I do so resign the living, and that I shall continue to
   administer the services of the church only till some
   clergyman, certified to me as coming from you or from
   the bishop, may present himself in the parish, and shall
   declare himself prepared to undertake the cure. Should it
   be so that Mr. Thumble be sent hither again, I will sit
   under him, endeavouring to catch improvement from his
   teaching, and striving to overcome the contempt which I
   felt for him when he before visited this parish. I annex
   beneath my signature a copy of the letter which I have
   written to the bishop on this subject.

   And now it behoves me, as the guardianship of the souls of
   those around me was placed in my hands by you, to explain
   to you as shortly as may be possible the reasons which
   have induced me to abandon my work. One or two whose
   judgment I do not discredit,--and I am allowed to name
   Dr. Tempest of Silverbridge as one,--have suggested to me
   that I should take no step myself till after my trial.
   They think that I should have regard to the chance of the
   verdict, so that the preferment may still be mine should
   I be acquitted; and they say, that should I be acquitted,
   the bishop's action against me must of necessity cease.
   That they are right in these facts I do not doubt; but
   in giving such advice they look only to facts, having no
   regard to the conscience. I do not blame them. I should
   give such advice myself, knowing that a friend may give
   counsel as to outer things, but that a man must satisfy
   his inner conscience by his own perceptions of what is
   right and what is wrong.

   I find myself to be ill-spoken of, to be regarded with
   hard eyes by those around me, my people thinking that I
   have stolen this money. Two farmers in this parish have,
   as I am aware, expressed opinions that no jury could
   acquit me honestly, and neither of these men have appeared
   in my church since the expression of that opinion. I doubt
   whether they have gone to other churches; and if not they
   have been deterred from all public worship by my presence.
   If this be so, how can I with a clear conscience remain
   among these men? Shall I take from their hands wages for
   those administrations, which their deliberately formed
   opinions will not allow them to accept from my hands?

And yet, though he thus pleaded against himself, he knew that the two
men of whom he was speaking were thick-headed dolts who were always
tipsy on Saturday nights, and who came to church perhaps once in
three weeks.

   Your kind heart will doubtless prompt you to tell me
   that no clergyman could be safe in his parish if he were
   to allow the opinion of chance parishioners to prevail
   against him; and you would probably lay down for my
   guidance that grand old doctrine, "Nil conscire sibi,
   nullâ pallescere culpâ." Presuming that you may do so, I
   will acknowledge such guidance to be good. If my mind were
   clear in this matter, I would not budge an inch for any
   farmer,--no, nor for any bishop, further than he might by
   law compel me! But my mind is not clear. I do grow pale,
   and my hair stands on end with horror, as I confess to
   myself that I do not know whether I stole this money or
   no! Such is the fact. In all sincerity I tell you that I
   know not whether I be guilty or innocent. It may be that
   I picked up the cheque from the floor of my room, and
   afterwards took it out and used it, not knowing whence it
   had come to me. If it be so, I stole it, and am guilty
   before the laws of my country. If it be so, I am not fit
   to administer the Lord's sacraments to these people. When
   the cup was last in my hand and I was blessing them,
   I felt that I was not fit, and I almost dropped the
   chalice. That God will know my weakness and pardon me
   the perplexity of my mind,--that is between Him and His
   creature.

   As I read my letter over to myself I feel how weak are my
   words, and how inefficient to explain to you the exact
   position in which I stand; but they will suffice to
   convince you that I am assuredly purposed to resign this
   parish of Hogglestock, and that it is therefore incumbent
   on you, as patron of the living, to nominate my successor
   to the benefice. I have only further to ask your pardon
   for this long letter, and to thank you again for the many
   and great marks of friendship which you have conferred on
   me. Alas, could you have foreseen in those old days how
   barren of all good would have been the life of him you
   then esteemed, you might perhaps have escaped the disgrace
   of being called the friend of one whom no one now regards
   with esteem.

   Nevertheless, I may still say that I am,
   With all affection, yours truly,

   JOSIAH CRAWLEY.


The last paragraph of the letter was also added since his wife had
read it. When he had first composed his letter, he had been somewhat
proud of his words, thinking that he had clearly told his story. But
when, sitting alone at his desk, he read it again, filling his mind
as he went on with ideas which he would fain have expressed to his
old friend, were it not that he feared to indulge himself with too
many words, he began to tell himself that his story was anything but
well told. There was no expression there of the Hoggethan doctrine.
In answer to such a letter as that the dean might well say, "Think
again of it. Try yet to save yourself. Never mind the two farmers, or
Mr. Thumble, or the bishop. Stick to the ship while there is a plank
above the water." Whereas it had been his desire to use words that
should make the dean clearly understand that the thing was decided.
He had failed,--as he had failed in everything throughout his life;
but nevertheless the letter must go. Were he to begin again he would
not do it better. So he added to what he had written a copy of his
note to the bishop, and the letter was fastened and sent.

Mrs. Crawley might probably have been more instant in her efforts
to stop the letter, had she not felt that it would not decide
everything. In the first place it was not improbable that the letter
might not reach the dean till after his return home,--and Mrs.
Crawley had long since made up her mind that she would see the dean
as soon as possible after his return. She had heard from Lady Lufton
that it was not doubted in Barchester that he would be back at any
rate before the judges came into the city. And then, in the next
place, was it probable that the dean would act upon such a letter by
filling up the vacancy, even if he did get it? She trusted in the
dean, and knew that he would help them, if any help were possible.
Should the verdict go against her husband, then indeed it might be
that no help would be possible. In such case she thought that the
bishop with his commission might prevail. But she still believed
that the verdict would be favourable,--if not with an assured belief,
still with a hope that was sufficient to stand in lieu of a belief.
No single man, let alone no twelve men, could think that her husband
had intended to appropriate that money dishonestly. That he had
taken it improperly,--without real possession,--she herself believed;
but he had not taken it as a thief, and could not merit a thief's
punishment.

After two days he got a reply from the bishop's chaplain, in which
the chaplain expressed the bishop's commendation of Mr. Crawley's
present conduct. "Mr. Thumble shall proceed from hence to Hogglestock
on next Sunday," said the chaplain, "and shall relieve you for the
present from the burden of your duties. As to the future status of
the parish, it will perhaps be best that nothing shall be done till
the dean returns,--or perhaps till the assizes shall be over. This is
the bishop's opinion." It need hardly be explained that the promised
visit of Mr. Thumble to Hogglestock was gall and wormwood to Mr.
Crawley. He had told the dean that should Mr. Thumble come, he would
endeavour to learn something even from him. But it may be doubted
whether Mr. Crawley in his present mood could learn anything useful
from Mr. Thumble. Giles Hoggett was a much more effective teacher.

"I will endure even that," he said to his wife, as she handed to him
back the letter from the bishop's chaplain.



