
JAEL.


On the first of March, Conway Dalrymple's easel was put up in Mrs.
Dobbs Broughton's boudoir upstairs, the canvas was placed upon it
on which the outlines of Jael and Sisera had been already drawn,
and Mrs. Broughton and Clara Van Siever and Conway Dalrymple were
assembled with the view of steady art-work. But before we see how
they began their work together, we will go back for a moment to John
Eames on his return to his London lodgings. The first thing every
man does when he returns home after an absence, is to look at his
letters, and John Eames looked at his. There were not very many.
There was a note marked immediate, from Sir Raffle Buffle, in which
Sir R. had scrawled in four lines a notification that he should be
driven to an extremity of inconvenience if Eames were not at his post
at half-past nine on the following morning. "I think I see myself
there at that hour," said John. There was a notification of a house
dinner, which he was asked to join, at his club, and a card for an
evening gathering at Lady Glencora Palliser's,--procured for him by
his friend Conway,--and an invitation to dinner at the house of his
uncle, Mr. Toogood; and there was a scented note in the handwriting
of a lady, which he did not recognize. "My nearest and dearest
friend, M. D. M.," he said, as he opened the note and looked at the
signature. Then he read the letter from Miss Demolines.


   MY DEAR MR. EAMES,

   Pray come to me at once. I know that you are to be back
   to-morrow. Do not lose an hour if you can help it. I shall
   be at home at half-past five. I fear what you know of has
   been begun. But it certainly shall not go on. In one way
   or another it must be prevented. I won't say another word
   till I see you, but pray come at once.

   Yours always,

   M. D. M.

   Thursday.

   Poor mamma isn't very well, so you had better ask for me.


"Beautiful!" said Johnny, as he read the note. "There's nothing I
like so much as a mystery,--especially if it's about nothing. I
wonder why she is so desperately anxious that the picture should not
be painted. I'd ask Dalrymple, only I should spoil the mystery." Then
he sat himself down, and began to think of Lily. There could be no
treason to Lily in his amusing himself with the freaks of such a
woman as Miss Demolines.

At eleven o'clock on the morning of the 1st of March,--the day
following that on which Miss Demolines had written her note,--the
easel was put up and the canvas was placed on it in Mrs. Broughton's
room. Mrs. Broughton and Clara were both there, and when they had
seen the outlines as far as it had been drawn, they proceeded to make
arrangements for their future operations. The period of work was to
begin always at eleven, and was to be continued for an hour and a
half or for two hours on the days on which they met. I fear that
there was a little improper scheming in this against the two persons
whom the ladies were bound to obey. Mr. Dobbs Broughton invariably
left his house soon after ten in the morning. It would sometimes
happen, though not frequently, that he returned home early in the
day,--at four perhaps, or even before that; and should he chance to
do so while the picture was going on, he would catch them at their
work if the work were postponed till after luncheon. And then again,
Mrs. Van Siever would often go out in the morning, and when she did
so, would always go without her daughter. On such occasions she went
into the City, or to other resorts of business, at which, in some
manner quite unintelligible to her daughter, she looked after her
money. But when she did not go out in the morning, she did go out
in the afternoon, and she would then require her daughter's company.
There was some place to which she always went of a Friday morning,
and at which she stayed for two or three hours. Friday therefore was
a fitting day on which to begin the work at Mrs. Broughton's house.
All this was explained between the three conspirators. Mrs. Dobbs
Broughton declared that if she entertained the slightest idea that
her husband would object to the painting of the picture in her room,
nothing on earth would induce her to lend her countenance to it; but
yet it might be well not to tell him just at first, perhaps not till
the sittings were over,--perhaps not till the picture was finished;
as, otherwise, tidings of the picture might get round to ears which
were not intended to hear it. "Poor dear Dobbs is so careless with a
secret." Miss Van Siever explained her motives in a very different
way. "I know mamma would not let me do it if she knew it; and
therefore I shall not tell her." "My dear Clara," said Mrs. Broughton
with a smile, "you are so outspoken!" "And why not?" said Miss Van
Siever. "I am old enough to judge for myself. If mamma does not want
to be deceived, she ought not to treat me like a child. Of course
she'll find it out sooner or later; but I don't care about that."
Conway Dalrymple said nothing as the two ladies were thus excusing
themselves. "How delightful it must be not to have a master," said
Mrs. Broughton, addressing him. "But then a man has to work for his
own bread," said he. "I suppose it comes about equal in the long
run."

Very little drawing or painting was done on that day. In the first
place it was necessary that the question of costume should be
settled, and both Mrs. Broughton and the artist had much to say on
the subject. It was considered proper that Jael should be dressed as
a Jewess, and there came to be much question how Jewesses dressed
themselves in those very early days. Mrs. Broughton had prepared her
jewels and raiment of many colours, but the painter declared that
the wife of Heber the Kenite would have no jewels. But when Mrs.
Broughton discovered from her Bible that Heber had been connected by
family ties with Moses, she was more than ever sure that Heber's wife
would have in her tent much of the spoilings of the Egyptians. And
when Clara Van Siever suggested that at any rate she would not have
worn them in a time of confusion when soldiers were loose, flying
about the country, Mrs. Broughton was quite confident that she would
have put them on before she invited the captain of the enemy's host
into her tent. The artist at last took the matter into his own hand
by declaring that Miss Van Siever would sit the subject much better
without jewels, and therefore all Mrs. Broughton's gewgaws were put
back into their boxes. And then on four different times the two
ladies had to retire into Mrs. Broughton's room in order that Jael
might be arrayed in various costumes,--and in each costume she had to
kneel down, taking the hammer in her hand, and holding the pointed
stick which had been prepared to do duty as the nail, upon the
forehead of a dummy Sisera. At last it was decided that her raiment
should be altogether white, and that she should wear, twisted round
her head and falling over her shoulder, a Roman silk scarf of various
colours. "Where Jael could have gotten it I don't know," said Clara.
"You may be sure that there were lots of such things among the
Egyptians," said Mrs. Broughton, "and that Moses brought away all the
best for his own family."

"And who is to be Sisera?" asked Mrs. Broughton in one of the pauses
in their work.

"I'm thinking of asking my friend John Eames to sit."

"Of course we cannot sit together," said Miss Van Siever.

"There's no reason why you should," said Dalrymple. "I can do the
second figure in my own room." Then there was a bargain made that
Sisera should not be a portrait. "It would never do," said Mrs.
Broughton, shaking her head very gravely.

Though there was really very little done to the picture on that day,
the work was commenced; and Mrs. Broughton, who had at first objected
strongly to the idea, and who had said twenty times that it was quite
out of the question that it should be done in her house, became very
eager in her delight about it. Nobody should know anything of the
picture till it should be exhibited. That would be best. And it
should be the picture of the year! She was a little heart-broken when
Dalrymple assured her that it could not possibly be finished for
exhibition in that May; but she came to again when he declared that
he meant to put out all his strength upon it. "There will be five or
six months' work in it," he said. "Will there, indeed? And how much
work was there in 'The Graces'?" "The Graces," as will perhaps be
remembered, was the triple portrait of Mrs. Dobbs Broughton herself.
This question the artist did not answer with absolute accuracy, but
contented himself with declaring that with such a model as Mrs.
Broughton the picture had been comparatively easy.

Mrs. Broughton, having no doubt that ultimate object of which she had
spoken to her friend Conway steadily in view, took occasion before
the sitting was over to leave the room, so that the artist might have
an opportunity of speaking a word in private to his model,--if he had
any such word to speak. And Mrs. Broughton, as she did this, felt
that she was doing her duty as a wife, a friend, and a Christian. She
was doing her duty as a wife, because she was giving the clearest
proof in the world,--the clearest at any rate to herself,--that the
intimacy between herself and her friend Conway had in it nothing that
was improper. And she was doing her duty as a friend, because Clara
Van Siever, with her large expectations, would be an eligible wife.
And she was doing her duty as a Christian, because the whole thing
was intended to be moral. Miss Demolines had declared that her
friend Maria Clutterbuck,--as Miss Demolines delighted to call Mrs.
Broughton, in memory of dear old innocent days,--had high principles;
and the reader will see that she was justified in her declaration.
"It will be better so," said Mrs. Broughton, as she sat upon her bed
and wiped a tear from the corner of her eye. "Yes; it will be better
so. There is a pang. Of course there's a pang. But it will be better
so." Acting upon this high principle, she allowed Conway Dalrymple
five minutes to say what he had to say to Clara Van Siever. Then she
allowed herself to indulge in some very savage feelings in reference
to her husband,--accusing her husband in her thoughts of great
cruelty,--nay, of brutality, because of certain sharp words that he
had said as to Conway Dalrymple. "But of course he can't understand,"
said Mrs. Broughton to herself. "How is it to be expected that he
should understand?"

But she allowed her friend on this occasion only five minutes,
thinking probably that so much time might suffice. A woman, when she
is jealous, is apt to attribute to the other woman with whom her
jealousy is concerned, both weakness and timidity, and to the man
both audacity and strength. A woman who has herself taken perhaps
twelve months in the winning, will think that another woman is to
be won in five minutes. It is not to be supposed that Mrs. Dobbs
Broughton had ever been won by any one except by Mr. Dobbs Broughton.
At least, let it not be supposed that she had ever acknowledged a
spark of love for Conway Dalrymple. But nevertheless there was enough
of jealousy in her present mood to make her think poorly of Miss
Van Siever's capacity for standing a siege against the artist's
eloquence. Otherwise, having left the two together with the object
which she had acknowledged to herself, she would hardly have returned
to them after so very short an interval.

"I hope you won't dislike the trouble of all this?" said Dalrymple to
his model, as soon as Mrs. Broughton was gone.

"I cannot say that I like it very much," said Miss Van Siever.

"I'm afraid it will be a bore;--but I hope you'll go through with
it."

"I shall if I am not prevented," said Miss Van Siever. "When I've
said that I'll do a thing, I like to do it."

There was a pause in the conversation which took up a considerable
portion of the five minutes. Miss Van Siever was not holding her nail
during these moments, but was sitting in a commonplace way on her
chair, while Dalrymple was scraping his palette. "I wonder what it
was that first induced you to sit?" said he.

"Oh, I don't know. I took a fancy for it."

"I'm very glad you did take the fancy. You'll make an excellent
model. If you won't mind posing again for a few minutes--I will not
weary you to-day. Your right arm a little more forward."

"But I should tumble down."

"Not if you lean well on to the nail."

"But that would have woken Sisera before she had struck a blow."

"Never mind that. Let us try it." Then Mrs. Broughton returned, with
that pleasant feeling in her bosom of having done her duty as a wife,
a friend, and a Christian. "Mrs. Broughton," continued the painter,
"just steady Miss Van Siever's shoulder with your hand; and now bring
the arm and the elbow a little more forward."

"But Jael did not have a friend to help her in that way," said Miss
Van Siever.

At the end of an hour and a half the two ladies retired, and Jael
disrobed herself, and Miss Van Siever put on her customary raiment.
It was agreed among them that they had commenced their work
auspiciously, and that they would meet again on the following Monday.
The artist begged to be allowed an hour to go on with his work in
Mrs. Broughton's room, and the hour was conceded to him. It was
understood that he could not take the canvas backwards and forwards
with him to his own house, and he pointed out that no progress
whatever could be made, unless he were occasionally allowed some
such grace as this. Mrs. Broughton doubted and hesitated, made
difficulties, and lifted up her hands in despair. "It is easy for
you to say, Why not? but I know very well why not." But at last she
gave way. "Honi soit qui mal y pense," she said; "that must be my
protection." So she followed Miss Van Siever downstairs, leaving Mr.
Dalrymple in possession of her boudoir. "I shall give you just one
hour," she said, "and then I shall come and turn you out." So she
went down, and, as Miss Van Siever would not stay to lunch with her,
she ate her lunch by herself, sending a glass of sherry and a biscuit
up to the poor painter at his work.

Exactly at the end of the hour she returned to him. "Now, Conway, you
must go," she said.

"But why in such a hurry?"

"Because I say that it must be so. When I say so, pray let that be
sufficient." But still Dalrymple went on working. "Conway," she said,
"how can you treat me with so much disdain?"

"Disdain, Mrs. Broughton!"

"Yes, disdain. Have I not begged you to understand that I cannot
allow you to remain here, and yet you pay no attention to my wishes."

"I have done now;" and he began to put his brushes and paints
together. "I suppose all these things may remain here?"

"Yes; they may remain. They must do so, of course. There; if you will
put the easel in the corner, with the canvas behind it, they will not
be seen if he should chance to come into the room."

"He would not be angry, I suppose, if he saw them?"

"There is no knowing. Men are so unreasonable. All men are, I think.
All those are whom I have had the fortune to know. Women generally
say that men are selfish. I do not complain so much that they are
selfish as that they are thoughtless. They are headstrong and do not
look forward to results. Now you,--I do not think you would willingly
do me an injury?"

"I do not think I would."

"I am sure you would not;--but yet you would forget to save me from
one."

"What injury?"

"Oh, never mind. I am not thinking of anything in particular. From
myself, for instance. But we will not talk about that. That way
madness lies. Tell me, Conway;--what do you think of Clara Van
Siever?"

"She is very handsome, certainly."

"And clever?"

"Decidedly clever. I should think she has a temper of her own."

"What woman is there worth a straw that has not? If Clara Van Siever
were ill-used, she would resent it. I do not doubt that for a moment.
I should not like to be the man who would do it."

"Nor I, either," said Conway.

"But there is plenty of feminine softness in that character, if she
were treated with love and kindness. Conway, if you will take my
advice you will ask Clara Van Siever to be your wife. But perhaps you
have already."

"Who; I?"

"Yes; you."

"I have not done it yet, certainly, Mrs. Broughton."

"And why should you not do it?"

"There are two or three reasons;--but perhaps none of any great
importance. Do you know of none, Mrs. Broughton?"

"I know of none," said Mrs. Broughton in a very serious,--in almost a
tragic tone;--"of none that should weigh for a moment. As far as I am
concerned, nothing would give me more pleasure."

"That is so kind of you!"

"I mean to be kind. I do, indeed, Conway. I know it will be better
for you that you should be settled,--very much better. And it will be
better for me. I do not mind admitting that;--though in saying so I
trust greatly to your generosity to interpret my words properly."

"I shall not flatter myself, if you mean that."

"There is no question of flattery, Conway. The question is simply of
truth and prudence. Do you not know that it would be better that you
should be married?"

"Not unless a certain gentleman were to die first," said Conway
Dalrymple, as he deposited the last of his painting paraphernalia in
the recess which had been prepared for them by Mrs. Broughton.

"Conway, how can you speak in that wicked, wicked way!"

"I can assure you I do not wish the gentleman in question the
slightest harm in the world. If his welfare depended on me, he should
be as safe as the Bank of England."

"And you will not take my advice?"

"What advice?"

"About Clara?"

"Mrs. Broughton, matrimony is a very important thing."

"Indeed, it is;--oh, who can say how important! There was a time,
Conway, when I thought you had given your heart to Madalina
Demolines."

"Heaven forbid!"

"And I grieved, because I thought that she was not worthy of you."

"There was never anything in that, Mrs. Broughton."

"She thought that there was. At any rate, she said so. I know that
for certain. She told me so herself. But let that pass. Clara Van
Siever is in every respect very different from Madalina. Clara, I
think, is worthy of you. And Conway,--of course it is not for me
to dictate to you; but this I must tell you--" Then she paused, as
though she did not know how to finish her sentence.

"What must you tell me?"

"I will tell you nothing more. If you cannot understand what I have
said, you must be more dull of comprehension than I believe you to
be. Now go. Why are you not gone this half-hour?"

"How could I go while you were giving me all this good advice?"

"I have not asked you to stay. Go now, at any rate. And, remember,
Conway, if this picture is to go on, I will not have you remaining
here after the work is done. Will you remember that?" And she held
him by the hand while he declared that he would remember it.

Mrs. Dobbs Broughton was no more in love with Conway Dalrymple than
she was in love with King Charles on horseback at Charing Cross.
And, over and beyond the protection which came to her in the course
of nature from unimpassioned feelings in this special phase of her
life,--and indeed, I may say, in every phase of her life,--it must be
acknowledged on her behalf that she did enjoy that protection which
comes from what we call principle,--though the principle was not
perhaps very high of its kind. Madalina Demolines had been right when
she talked of her friend Maria's principles. Dobbs Broughton had been
so far lucky in that jump in the dark which he had made in taking a
wife to himself, that he had not fallen upon a really vicious woman,
or upon a woman of strong feeling. If it had come to be the lot of
Mrs. Dobbs Broughton to have six hours' work to do every day of her
life, I think that the work would have been done badly, but that it
would have kept her free from all danger. As it was she had nothing
to do. She had no child. She was not given to much reading. She could
not sit with a needle in her hand all day. She had no aptitude for
May meetings, or the excitement of charitable good works. Life with
her was very dull, and she found no amusement within her reach so
easy and so pleasant as the amusement of pretending to be in love. If
all that she did and all that she said could only have been taken for
its worth and for nothing more, by the different persons concerned,
there was very little in it to flatter Mr. Dalrymple or to give cause
for tribulation to Mr. Broughton. She probably cared but little for
either of them. She was one of those women to whom it is not given by
nature to care very much for anybody. But, of the two, she certainly
cared the most for Mr. Dobbs Broughton,--because Mr. Dobbs Broughton
belonged to her. As to leaving Mr. Dobbs Broughton's house, and
putting herself into the hands of another man,--no Imogen of a wife
was ever less likely to take a step so wicked, so dangerous, and so
generally disagreeable to all the parties concerned.

But Conway Dalrymple,--though now and again he had got a side glance
at her true character with clear-seeing eyes,--did allow himself to
be flattered and deceived. He knew that she was foolish and ignorant,
and that she often talked wonderful nonsense. He knew also that she
was continually contradicting herself,--as when she would strenuously
beg him to leave her, while she would continue to talk to him
in a strain that prevented the possibility of his going. But,
nevertheless, he was flattered, and he did believe that she loved
him. As to his love for her,--he knew very well that it amounted to
nothing. Now and again, perhaps twice a week, if he saw her as often,
he would say something which would imply a declaration of affection.
He felt that as much as that was expected from him, and that he
ought not to hope to get off cheaper. And now that this little
play was going on about Miss Van Siever, he did think that Mrs.
Dobbs Broughton was doing her very best to overcome an unfortunate
attachment. It is so gratifying to a young man's feelings to suppose
that another man's wife has conceived an unfortunate attachment for
him! Conway Dalrymple ought not to have been fooled by such a woman;
but I fear that he was fooled by her.

As he returned home to-day from Mrs. Broughton's house to his own
lodgings he rambled out for a while into Kensington Gardens, and
thought of his position seriously. "I don't see why I should not
marry her," he said to himself, thinking of course of Miss Van
Siever. "If Maria is not in earnest it is not my fault. And it would
be my wish that she should be in earnest. If I suppose her to be so,
and take her at her word, she can have no right to quarrel with me.
Poor Maria! at any rate it will be better for her, for no good can
come of this kind of thing. And, by heavens, with a woman like that,
of strong feelings, one never knows what may happen." And then he
thought of the condition he would be in, if he were to find her some
fine day in his own rooms, and if she were to tell him that she could
not go home again, and that she meant to remain with him!

In the meantime Mrs. Dobbs Broughton had gone down into her own
drawing-room, had tucked herself up on the sofa, and had fallen fast
asleep.



