
HOW TO WRITE A LOVE LETTER.


Dr. Thorne, in the few words which he spoke to his niece before he
left Boxall Hill, had called himself an old man; but he was as yet on
the right side of sixty by five good years, and bore about with him
less of the marks of age than most men of fifty-five do bear. One
would have said in looking at him that there was no reason why he
should not marry if he found that such a step seemed good to him;
and looking at the age of the proposed bride, there was nothing
unsuitable in that respect.

But nevertheless he felt almost ashamed of himself, in that he
allowed himself even to think of the proposition which his niece had
made. He mounted his horse that day at Boxall Hill--for he made all
his journeys about the county on horseback--and rode slowly home to
Greshamsbury, thinking not so much of the suggested marriage as of
his own folly in thinking of it. How could he be such an ass at his
time of life as to allow the even course of his way to be disturbed
by any such idea? Of course he could not propose to himself such a
wife as Miss Dunstable without having some thoughts as to her wealth;
and it had been the pride of his life so to live that the world might
know that he was indifferent about money. His profession was all in
all to him,--the air which he breathed as well as the bread which
he ate; and how could he follow his profession if he made such a
marriage as this? She would expect him to go to London with her; and
what would he become, dangling at her heels there, known only to the
world as the husband of the richest woman in the town? The kind of
life was one which would be unsuitable to him;--and yet, as he rode
home, he could not resolve to rid himself of the idea. He went on
thinking of it, though he still continued to condemn himself for
keeping it in his thoughts. That night at home he would make up his
mind, so he declared to himself; and would then write to his niece
begging her to drop the subject. Having so far come to a resolution
he went on meditating what course of life it might be well for him
to pursue if he and Miss Dunstable should, after all, become man and
wife.

There were two ladies whom it behoved him to see on the day of
his arrival--whom, indeed, he generally saw every day except when
absent from Greshamsbury. The first of these--first in the general
consideration of the people of the place--was the wife of the squire,
Lady Arabella Gresham, a very old patient of the doctor's. Her it was
his custom to visit early in the afternoon; and then, if he were able
to escape the squire's daily invitation to dinner, he customarily
went to the other, Lady Scatcherd, when the rapid meal in his own
house was over. Such, at least, was his summer practice.

"Well, doctor, how are they at Boxall Hill?" said the squire,
waylaying him on the gravel sweep before the door. The squire was
very hard set for occupation in these summer months.

"Quite well, I believe."

"I don't know what's come to Frank. I think he hates this place now.
He's full of the election, I suppose."

"Oh, yes; he told me to say he should be over here soon. Of course
there'll be no contest, so he need not trouble himself."

"Happy dog, isn't he, doctor? to have it all before him instead of
behind him. Well, well; he's as good a lad as ever lived,--as ever
lived. And let me see; Mary's time--" And then there were a few very
important words spoken on that subject.

"I'll just step up to Lady Arabella now," said the doctor.

"She's as fretful as possible," said the squire. "I've just left
her."

"Nothing special the matter, I hope?"

"No, I think not; nothing in your way, that is; only specially
cross, which always comes in my way. You'll stop and dine to-day, of
course?"

"Not to-day, squire."

"Nonsense; you will. I have been quite counting on you. I have a
particular reason for wanting to have you to-day,--a most particular
reason." But the squire always had his particular reasons.

"I'm very sorry, but it is impossible to-day. I shall have a letter
to write that I must sit down to seriously. Shall I see you when I
come down from her ladyship?"

The squire turned away sulkily, almost without answering him, for he
now had no prospect of any alleviation to the tedium of the evening;
and the doctor went up-stairs to his patient.

For Lady Arabella, though it cannot be said that she was ill, was
always a patient. It must not be supposed that she kept her bed and
swallowed daily doses, or was prevented from taking her share in such
prosy gaieties as came from time to time in the way of her prosy
life; but it suited her turn of mind to be an invalid and to have a
doctor; and as the doctor whom her good fates had placed at her elbow
thoroughly understood her case, no great harm was done.

"It frets me dreadfully that I cannot get to see Mary," Lady Arabella
said, as soon as the first ordinary question as to her ailments had
been asked and answered.

"She's quite well and will be over to see you before long."

"Now I beg that she won't. She never thinks of coming when there
can be no possible objection, and travelling, at the present moment,
would be--" Whereupon the Lady Arabella shook her head very gravely.
"Only think of the importance of it, doctor," she said. "Remember the
enormous stake there is to be considered."

"It would not do her a ha'porth of harm if the stake were twice as
large."

"Nonsense, doctor, don't tell me; as if I didn't know myself. I was
very much against her going to London this spring, but of course what
I said was overruled. It always is. I do believe Mr. Gresham went
over to Boxall Hill, on purpose to induce her to go. But what does he
care? He's fond of Frank; but he never thinks of looking beyond the
present day. He never did, as you know well enough, doctor."

"The trip did her all the good in the world," said Dr. Thorne,
preferring anything to a conversation respecting the squire's sins.

"I very well remember that when I was in that way it wasn't thought
that such trips would do me any good. But, perhaps, things are
altered since then."

"Yes, they are," said the doctor. "We don't interfere so much
now-a-days."

"I know I never asked for such amusements when so much depended on
quietness. I remember before Frank was born--and, indeed, when all of
them were born-- But as you say, things were different then; and I
can easily believe that Mary is a person quite determined to have her
own way."

"Why, Lady Arabella, she would have stayed at home without wishing to
stir if Frank had done so much as hold up his little finger."

"So did I always. If Mr. Gresham made the slightest hint I gave way.
But I really don't see what one gets in return for such implicit
obedience. Now this year, doctor, of course I should have liked
to have been up in London for a week or two. You seemed to think
yourself that I might as well see Sir Omicron."

"There could be no possible objection, I said."

"Well; no; exactly; and as Mr. Gresham knew I wished it, I think he
might as well have offered it. I suppose there can be no reason now
about money."

"But I understood that Mary specially asked you and Augusta?"

"Yes; Mary was very good. She did ask me. But I know very well that
Mary wants all the room she has got in London. The house is not at
all too large for herself. And, for the matter of that, my sister,
the countess, was very anxious that I should be with her. But one
does like to be independent if one can, and for one fortnight I do
think that Mr. Gresham might have managed it. When I knew that he was
so dreadfully out at elbows I never troubled him about it,--though,
goodness knows, all that was never my fault."

"The squire hates London. A fortnight there in warm weather would
nearly be the death of him."

"He might at any rate have paid me the compliment of asking me.
The chances are ten to one I should not have gone. It is that
indifference that cuts me so. He was here just now, and, would you
believe it?--"

But the doctor was determined to avoid further complaint for the
present day. "I wonder what you would feel, Lady Arabella, if the
squire were to take it into his head to go away and amuse himself,
leaving you at home. There are worse men than Mr. Gresham, if you
will believe me." All this was an allusion to Earl de Courcy, her
ladyship's brother, as Lady Arabella very well understood; and the
argument was one which was very often used to silence her.

"Upon my word, then, I should like it better than his hanging about
here doing nothing but attend to those nasty dogs. I really sometimes
think that he has no spirit left."

"You are mistaken there, Lady Arabella," said the doctor, rising with
his hat in his hand and making his escape without further parley.

As he went home he could not but think that that phase of married
life was not a very pleasant one. Mr. Gresham and his wife were
supposed by the world to live on the best of terms. They always
inhabited the same house, went out together when they did go out,
always sat in their respective corners in the family pew, and in
their wildest dreams after the happiness of novelty never thought of
Sir Cresswell Cresswell. In some respects--with regard, for instance,
to the continued duration of their joint domesticity at the family
mansion of Greshamsbury--they might have been taken for a pattern
couple. But yet, as far as the doctor could see, they did not seem
to add much to the happiness of each other. They loved each other,
doubtless, and had either of them been in real danger, that danger
would have made the other miserable; but yet it might well be a
question whether either would not be more comfortable without the
other.

The doctor, as was his custom, dined at five, and at seven he went
up to the cottage of his old friend Lady Scatcherd. Lady Scatcherd
was not a refined woman, having in her early days been a labourer's
daughter and having then married a labourer. But her husband had
risen in the world--as has been told in those chronicles before
mentioned,--and his widow was now Lady Scatcherd with a pretty
cottage and a good jointure. She was in all things the very opposite
to Lady Arabella Gresham; nevertheless, under the doctor's auspices,
the two ladies were in some measure acquainted with each other. Of
her married life, also, Dr. Thorne had seen something, and it may
be questioned whether the memory of that was more alluring than the
reality now existing at Greshamsbury.

Of the two women Dr. Thorne much preferred his humbler friend, and
to her he made his visits not in the guise of a doctor, but as a
neighbour. "Well, my lady," he said, as he sat down by her on a broad
garden seat--all the world called Lady Scatcherd "my lady,"--"and how
do these long summer days agree with you? Your roses are twice better
out than any I see up at the big house."

"You may well call them long, doctor. They're long enough surely."

"But not too long. Come, now, I won't have you complaining. You don't
mean to tell me that you have anything to make you wretched? You had
better not, for I won't believe you."

"Eh; well; wretched! I don't know as I'm wretched. It'd be wicked to
say that, and I with such comforts about me."

"I think it would, almost." The doctor did not say this harshly, but
in a soft, friendly tone, and pressing her hand gently as he spoke.

"And I didn't mean to be wicked. I'm very thankful for
everything--leastways, I always try to be. But, doctor, it is so
lonely like."

"Lonely! not more lonely than I am."

"Oh, yes; you're different. You can go everywheres. But what can a
lone woman do? I'll tell you what, doctor; I'd give it all up to have
Roger back with his apron on and his pick in his hand. How well I
mind his look when he'd come home o' nights."

"And yet it was a hard life you had then, eh, old woman? It would be
better for you to be thankful for what you've got."

"I am thankful. Didn't I tell you so before?" said she, somewhat
crossly. "But it's a sad life, this living alone. I declares I envy
Hannah, 'cause she's got Jemima to sit in the kitchen with her. I
want her to sit with me sometimes, but she won't."

"Ah! but you shouldn't ask her. It's letting yourself down."

"What do I care about down or up? It makes no difference, as he's
gone. If he had lived one might have cared about being up, as you
call it. Eh, deary; I'll be going after him before long, and it will
be no matter then."

"We shall all be going after him, sooner or later; that's sure
enough."

"Eh, dear, that's true, surely. It's only a span long, as Parson
Oriel tells us when he gets romantic in his sermons. But it's a hard
thing, doctor, when two is married, as they can't have their span,
as he calls it, out together. Well, I must only put up with it, I
suppose, as others does. Now, you're not going, doctor? You'll stop
and have a dish of tea with me. You never see such cream as Hannah
has from the Alderney cow. Do'ey now, doctor."

But the doctor had his letter to write, and would not allow himself
to be tempted even by the promise of Hannah's cream. So he went
his way, angering Lady Scatcherd by his departure as he had
before angered the squire, and thinking as he went which was most
unreasonable in her wretchedness, his friend Lady Arabella, or his
friend Lady Scatcherd. The former was always complaining of an
existing husband who never refused her any moderate request; and the
other passed her days in murmuring at the loss of a dead husband,
who in his life had ever been to her imperious and harsh, and had
sometimes been cruel and unjust.

The doctor had his letter to write, but even yet he had not quite
made up his mind what he would put into it; indeed, he had not
hitherto resolved to whom it should be written. Looking at the matter
as he had endeavoured to look at it, his niece, Mrs. Gresham, would
be his correspondent; but if he brought himself to take this jump
in the dark, in that case he would address himself direct to Miss
Dunstable.

He walked home, not by the straightest road, but taking a
considerable curve, round by narrow lanes, and through thick
flower-laden hedges,--very thoughtful. He was told that she wished to
marry him; and was he to think only of himself? And as to that pride
of his about money, was it in truth a hearty, manly feeling; or was
it a false pride, of which it behoved him to be ashamed as it did
of many cognate feelings? If he acted rightly in this matter, why
should he be afraid of the thoughts of any one? A life of solitude
was bitter enough, as poor Lady Scatcherd had complained. But then,
looking at Lady Scatcherd, and looking also at his other near
neighbour, his friend the squire, there was little thereabouts to
lead him on to matrimony. So he walked home slowly through the lanes,
very meditative, with his hands behind his back.

Nor when he got home was he much more inclined to any resolute line
of action. He might have drunk his tea with Lady Scatcherd, as well
as have sat there in his own drawing-room, drinking it alone; for he
got no pen and paper, and he dawdled over his teacup with the utmost
dilatoriness, putting off, as it were, the evil day. To only one
thing was he fixed--to this, namely, that that letter should be
written before he went to bed.

Having finished his tea, which did not take place till near eleven,
he went downstairs to an untidy little room which lay behind his
depôt of medicines, and in which he was wont to do his writing;
and herein he did at last set himself down to his work. Even at
that moment he was in doubt. But he would write his letter to Miss
Dunstable and see how it looked. He was almost determined not to send
it; so, at least, he said to himself: but he could do no harm by
writing it. So he did write it, as follows:--


   Greshamsbury, -- June, 185--.

   MY DEAR MISS DUNSTABLE,--


When he had got so far, he leaned back in his chair and looked at the
paper. How on earth was he to find words to say that which he now
wished to have said? He had never written such a letter in his life,
or anything approaching to it, and now found himself overwhelmed with
a difficulty of which he had not previously thought. He spent another
half-hour in looking at the paper, and was at last nearly deterred by
this new difficulty. He would use the simplest, plainest language, he
said to himself over and over again; but it is not always easy to use
simple, plain language,--by no means so easy as to mount on stilts,
and to march along with sesquipedalian words, with pathos, spasms,
and notes of interjection. But the letter did at last get itself
written, and there was not a note of interjection in it.


   MY DEAR MISS DUNSTABLE,--I think it right to confess that
   I should not be now writing this letter to you, had I not
   been led to believe by other judgment than my own that the
   proposition which I am going to make would be regarded
   by you with favour. Without such other judgment I should,
   I own, have feared that the great disparity between you
   and me in regard to money would have given to such a
   proposition an appearance of being false and mercenary.
   All I ask of you now, with confidence, is to acquit me of
   such fault as that.

   When you have read so far you will understand what I mean.
   We have known each other now somewhat intimately, though
   indeed not very long, and I have sometimes fancied that
   you were almost as well pleased to be with me as I have
   been to be with you. If I have been wrong in this, tell me
   so simply, and I will endeavour to let our friendship run
   on as though this letter had not been written. But if I
   have been right, and if it be possible that you can think
   that a union between us will make us both happier than we
   are single, I will plight you my word and troth with good
   faith, and will do what an old man may do to make the
   burden of the world lie light upon your shoulders. Looking
   at my age I can hardly keep myself from thinking that I
   am an old fool: but I try to reconcile myself to that by
   remembering that you yourself are no longer a girl. You
   see that I pay you no compliments, and that you need
   expect none from me.

   I do not know that I could add anything to the truth of
   this, if I were to write three times as much. All that is
   necessary is, that you should know what I mean. If you do
   not believe me to be true and honest already, nothing that
   I can write will make you believe it.

   God bless you. I know you will not keep me long in
   suspense for an answer.

   Affectionately your friend,

   THOMAS THORNE.


When he had finished he meditated again for another half-hour whether
it would not be right that he should add something about her money.
Would it not be well for him to tell her--it might be said in a
postscript--that with regard to all her wealth she would be free to
do what she chose? At any rate he owed no debts for her to pay, and
would still have his own income, sufficient for his own purposes. But
about one o'clock he came to the conclusion that it would be better
to leave the matter alone. If she cared for him, and could trust him,
and was worthy also that he should trust her, no omission of such a
statement would deter her from coming to him: and if there were no
such trust, it would not be created by any such assurance on his
part. So he read the letter over twice, sealed it, and took it up,
together with his bed candle, into his bed-room. Now that the letter
was written it seemed to be a thing fixed by fate that it must go.
He had written it that he might see how it looked when written; but
now that it was written, there remained no doubt but that it must be
sent. So he went to bed, with the letter on the toilette-table beside
him; and early in the morning--so early as to make it seem that the
importance of the letter had disturbed his rest--he sent it off by a
special messenger to Boxall Hill.

"I'se wait for an answer?" said the boy.

"No," said the doctor: "leave the letter, and come away."

The breakfast hour was not very early at Boxall Hill in these summer
months. Frank Gresham, no doubt, went round his farm before he came
in for prayers, and his wife was probably looking to the butter
in the dairy. At any rate, they did not meet till near ten, and
therefore, though the ride from Greshamsbury to Boxall Hill was
nearly two hours' work, Miss Dunstable had her letter in her own room
before she came down.

She read it in silence as she was dressing, while the maid was with
her in the room; but she made no sign which could induce her Abigail
to think that the epistle was more than ordinarily important.
She read it, and then quietly refolding it and placing it in the
envelope, she put it down on the table at which she was sitting.
It was full fifteen minutes afterwards that she begged her servant
to see if Mrs. Gresham were still in her own room. "Because I want
to see her for five minutes, alone, before breakfast," said Miss
Dunstable.

"You traitor; you false, black traitor!" were the first words which
Miss Dunstable spoke when she found herself alone with her friend.

"Why, what's the matter?"

"I did not think there was so much mischief in you, nor so keen and
commonplace a desire for match-making. Look here. Read the first four
lines; not more, if you please; the rest is private. Whose is the
other judgment of whom your uncle speaks in his letter?"

"Oh, Miss Dunstable! I must read it all."

"Indeed you'll do no such thing. You think it's a love-letter, I dare
say; but indeed there's not a word about love in it."

"I know he has offered. I shall be so glad, for I know you like him."

"He tells me that I am an old woman, and insinuates that I may
probably be an old fool."

"I am sure he does not say that."

"Ah! but I'm sure that he does. The former is true enough, and I
never complain of the truth. But as to the latter, I am by no means
so certain that it is true--not in the sense that he means it."

"Dear, dearest woman, don't go on in that way now. Do speak out to
me, and speak without jesting."

"Whose was the other judgment to whom he trusts so implicitly? Tell
me that."

"Mine, mine, of course. No one else can have spoken to him about it.
Of course I talked to him."

"And what did you tell him?"

"I told him--"

"Well, out with it. Let me have the real facts. Mind, I tell you
fairly that you had no right to tell him anything. What passed
between us, passed in confidence. But let us hear what you did say."

"I told him that you would have him if he offered." And Mrs. Gresham,
as she spoke, looked into her friend's face doubtingly, not knowing
whether in very truth Miss Dunstable were pleased with her or
displeased. If she were displeased, then how had her uncle been
deceived!

"You told him that as a fact?"

"I told him that I thought so."

"Then I suppose I am bound to have him," said Miss Dunstable,
dropping the letter on to the floor in mock despair.

"My dear, dear, dearest woman!" said Mrs. Gresham, bursting into
tears, and throwing herself on to her friend's neck.

"Mind you are a dutiful niece," said Miss Dunstable. "And now let me
go and finish dressing."

In the course of the afternoon, an answer was sent back to
Greshamsbury, in these words:--


   DEAR DR. THORNE,--I do and will trust you in everything;
   and it shall be as you would have it. Mary writes to you;
   but do not believe a word she says. I never will again,
   for she has behaved so bad in this matter.

   Yours affectionately and very truly,

   MARTHA DUNSTABLE.


"And so I am going to marry the richest woman in England," said Dr.
Thorne to himself, as he sat down that day to his mutton-chop.



