
GRISELDA GRANTLY.


It was nearly a month after this that Lucy was first introduced to
Lord Lufton, and then it was brought about only by accident. During
that time Lady Lufton had been often at the parsonage, and had in a
certain degree learned to know Lucy; but the stranger in the parish
had never yet plucked up courage to accept one of the numerous
invitations that had reached her. Mr. Robarts and his wife had
frequently been at Framley Court, but the dreaded day of Lucy's
initiation had not yet arrived.

She had seen Lord Lufton in church, but hardly so as to know him, and
beyond that she had not seen him at all. One day, however--or rather,
one evening, for it was already dusk--he overtook her and Mrs.
Robarts on the road walking towards the vicarage. He had his gun on
his shoulder, three pointers were at his heels, and a gamekeeper
followed a little in the rear.

"How are you, Mrs. Robarts?" he said, almost before he had overtaken
them. "I have been chasing you along the road for the last half mile.
I never knew ladies walk so fast."

"We should be frozen if we were to dawdle about as you gentlemen do,"
and then she stopped and shook hands with him. She forgot at the
moment that Lucy and he had not met, and therefore she did not
introduce them.

"Won't you make me known to your sister-in-law?" said he, taking off
his hat, and bowing to Lucy. "I have never yet had the pleasure of
meeting her, though we have been neighbours for a month and more."

Fanny made her excuses and introduced them, and then they went on
till they came to Framley Gate, Lord Lufton talking to them both, and
Fanny answering for the two, and there they stopped for a moment.

"I am surprised to see you alone," Mrs. Robarts had just said; "I
thought that Captain Culpepper was with you."

"The captain has left me for this one day. If you'll whisper I'll
tell you where he has gone. I dare not speak it out loud, even to the
woods."

"To what terrible place can he have taken himself? I'll have no
whisperings about such horrors."

"He has gone to--to--but you'll promise not to tell my mother?"

"Not tell your mother! Well, now you have excited my curiosity! where
can he be?"

"Do you promise, then?"

"Oh, yes! I will promise, because I am sure Lady Lufton won't ask me
as to Captain Culpepper's whereabouts. We won't tell; will we, Lucy?"

"He has gone to Gatherum Castle for a day's pheasant-shooting. Now,
mind, you must not betray us. Her ladyship supposes that he is shut
up in his room with a toothache. We did not dare to mention the name
to her."

And then it appeared that Mrs. Robarts had some engagement which made
it necessary that she should go up and see Lady Lufton, whereas Lucy
was intending to walk on to the parsonage alone.

"And I have promised to go to your husband," said Lord Lufton; "or
rather to your husband's dog, Ponto. And I will do two other good
things--I will carry a brace of pheasants with me, and protect Miss
Robarts from the evil spirits of the Framley roads." And so Mrs.
Robarts turned in at the gate, and Lucy and his lordship walked off
together.

Lord Lufton, though he had never before spoken to Miss Robarts, had
already found out that she was by no means plain. Though he had
hardly seen her except at church, he had already made himself certain
that the owner of that face must be worth knowing, and was not sorry
to have the present opportunity of speaking to her. "So you have
an unknown damsel shut up in your castle," he had once said to Mrs.
Robarts. "If she be kept a prisoner much longer, I shall find it my
duty to come and release her by force of arms." He had been there
twice with the object of seeing her, but on both occasions Lucy had
managed to escape. Now we may say she was fairly caught, and Lord
Lufton, taking a pair of pheasants from the gamekeeper, and swinging
them over his shoulder, walked off with his prey.


[Illustration: Lord Lufton and Lucy Robarts.]


"You have been here a long time," he said, "without our having had
the pleasure of seeing you."

"Yes, my lord," said Lucy. Lords had not been frequent among her
acquaintance hitherto.

"I tell Mrs. Robarts that she has been confining you illegally, and
that we shall release you by force or stratagem."

"I--I--I have had a great sorrow lately."

"Yes, Miss Robarts; I know you have; and I am only joking, you know.
But I do hope that now you will be able to come amongst us. My mother
is so anxious that you should do so."

"I am sure she is very kind, and you also--my lord."

"I never knew my own father," said Lord Lufton, speaking gravely.
"But I can well understand what a loss you have had." And then, after
pausing a moment, he continued, "I remember Dr. Robarts well."

"Do you, indeed?" said Lucy, turning sharply towards him, and
speaking now with some animation in her voice. Nobody had yet spoken
to her about her father since she had been at Framley. It had been as
though the subject were a forbidden one. And how frequently is this
the case! When those we love are dead, our friends dread to mention
them, though to us who are bereaved no subject would be so pleasant
as their names. But we rarely understand how to treat our own sorrow
or those of others.

There was once a people in some land--and they may be still there
for what I know--who thought it sacrilegious to stay the course of a
raging fire. If a house were being burned, burn it must, even though
there were facilities for saving it. For who would dare to interfere
with the course of the god? Our idea of sorrow is much the same. We
think it wicked, or at any rate heartless, to put it out. If a man's
wife be dead, he should go about lugubrious, with long face, for at
least two years, or perhaps with full length for eighteen months,
decreasing gradually during the other six. If he be a man who can
quench his sorrow--put out his fire as it were--in less time than
that, let him at any rate not show his power!

"Yes: I remember him," continued Lord Lufton. "He came twice to
Framley while I was a boy, consulting with my mother about Mark and
myself,--whether the Eton floggings were not more efficacious than
those at Harrow. He was very kind to me, foreboding all manner of
good things on my behalf."

"He was very kind to every one," said Lucy.

"I should think he would have been--a kind, good, genial man--just
the man to be adored by his own family."

"Exactly; and so he was. I do not remember that I ever heard an
unkind word from him. There was not a harsh tone in his voice. And
he was generous as the day." Lucy, we have said, was not generally
demonstrative, but now, on this subject, and with this absolute
stranger, she became almost eloquent.

"I do not wonder that you should feel his loss, Miss Robarts."

"Oh, I do feel it. Mark is the best of brothers, and, as for Fanny,
she is too kind and too good to me. But I had always been specially
my father's friend. For the last year or two we had lived so much
together!"

"He was an old man when he died, was he not?"

"Just seventy, my lord."

"Ah, then he was old. My mother is only fifty, and we sometimes call
her the old woman. Do you think she looks older than that? We all say
that she makes herself out to be so much more ancient than she need
do."

"Lady Lufton does not dress young."

"That is it. She never has, in my memory. She always used to wear
black when I first recollect her. She has given that up now; but she
is still very sombre; is she not?"

"I do not like ladies to dress very young, that is, ladies of--of--"

"Ladies of fifty, we will say?"

"Very well; ladies of fifty, if you like it."

"Then I am sure you will like my mother."

They had now turned up through the parsonage wicket, a little gate
that opened into the garden at a point on the road nearer than the
chief entrance.

"I suppose I shall find Mark up at the house?" said he.

"I daresay you will, my lord."

"Well, I'll go round this way, for my business is partly in the
stable. You see I am quite at home here, though you never have seen
me before. But, Miss Robarts, now that the ice is broken, I hope that
we may be friends." He then put out his hand, and when she gave him
hers he pressed it almost as an old friend might have done.

And, indeed, Lucy had talked to him almost as though he were an old
friend. For a minute or two she had forgotten that he was a lord and
a stranger--had forgotten also to be stiff and guarded as was her
wont. Lord Lufton had spoken to her as though he had really cared to
know her; and she, unconsciously, had been taken by the compliment.
Lord Lufton, indeed, had not thought much about it--excepting as
thus, that he liked the glance of a pair of bright eyes, as most
other young men do like it. But, on this occasion, the evening had
been so dark, that he had hardly seen Lucy's eyes at all.

"Well, Lucy, I hope you liked your companion," Mrs. Robarts said,
as the three of them clustered round the drawing-room fire before
dinner.

"Oh, yes; pretty well," said Lucy.

"That is not at all complimentary to his lordship."

"I did not mean to be complimentary, Fanny."

"Lucy is a great deal too matter-of-fact for compliments," said Mark.

"What I meant was, that I had no great opportunity for judging,
seeing that I was only with Lord Lufton for about ten minutes."

"Ah! but there are girls here who would give their eyes for ten
minutes of Lord Lufton to themselves. You do not know how he's
valued. He has the character of being always able to make himself
agreeable to ladies at half a minute's warning."

"Perhaps he had not the half-minute's warning in this case," said
Lucy,--hypocrite that she was.

"Poor Lucy," said her brother; "he was coming up to see Ponto's
shoulder, and I am afraid he was thinking more about the dog than
you."

"Very likely," said Lucy; and then they went in to dinner.

Lucy had been a hypocrite, for she had confessed to herself, while
dressing, that Lord Lufton had been very pleasant; but then it is
allowed to young ladies to be hypocrites when the subject under
discussion is the character of a young gentleman.

Soon after that, Lucy did dine at Framley Court. Captain Culpepper,
in spite of his enormity with reference to Gatherum Castle, was still
staying there, as was also a clergyman from the neighbourhood of
Barchester with his wife and daughter. This was Archdeacon Grantly,
a gentleman whom we have mentioned before, and who was as well known
in the diocese as the bishop himself,--and more thought about by many
clergymen than even that illustrious prelate.

Miss Grantly was a young lady not much older than Lucy Robarts,
and she also was quiet, and not given to much talking in open
company. She was decidedly a beauty, but somewhat statuesque in her
loveliness. Her forehead was high and white, but perhaps too like
marble to gratify the taste of those who are fond of flesh and blood.
Her eyes were large and exquisitely formed, but they seldom showed
much emotion. She, indeed, was impassive herself, and betrayed but
little of her feelings. Her nose was nearly Grecian, not coming
absolutely in a straight line from her forehead, but doing so nearly
enough to entitle it to be considered as classical. Her mouth, too,
was very fine--artists, at least, said so, and connoisseurs in
beauty; but to me she always seemed as though she wanted fulness of
lip. But the exquisite symmetry of her cheek and chin and lower face
no man could deny. Her hair was light, and being always dressed with
considerable care, did not detract from her appearance; but it lacked
that richness which gives such luxuriance to feminine loveliness. She
was tall and slight, and very graceful in her movements; but there
were those who thought that she wanted the ease and _abandon_ of
youth. They said that she was too composed and stiff for her age, and
that she gave but little to society beyond the beauty of her form and
face.

There can be no doubt, however, that she was considered by most men
and women to be the beauty of Barsetshire, and that gentlemen from
neighbouring counties would come many miles through dirty roads on
the mere hope of being able to dance with her. Whatever attractions
she may have lacked, she had at any rate created for herself a great
reputation. She had spent two months of the last spring in London,
and even there she had made a sensation; and people had said that
Lord Dumbello, Lady Hartletop's eldest son, had been peculiarly
struck with her.

It may be imagined that the archdeacon was proud of her, and so
indeed was Mrs. Grantly--more proud, perhaps, of her daughter's
beauty, than so excellent a woman should have allowed herself to be
of such an attribute. Griselda--that was her name--was now an only
daughter. One sister she had had, but that sister had died. There
were two brothers also left, one in the Church and the other in the
army. That was the extent of the archdeacon's family, and as the
archdeacon was a very rich man--he was the only child of his father,
who had been Bishop of Barchester for a great many years; and
in those years it had been worth a man's while to be Bishop of
Barchester--it was supposed that Miss Grantly would have a large
fortune. Mrs. Grantly, however, had been heard to say, that she was
in no hurry to see her daughter established in the world;--ordinary
young ladies are merely married, but those of real importance are
established:--and this, if anything, added to the value of the prize.
Mothers sometimes depreciate their wares by an undue solicitude to
dispose of them.

But to tell the truth openly and at once--a virtue for which a
novelist does not receive very much commendation--Griselda Grantly
was, to a certain extent, already given away. Not that she, Griselda,
knew anything about it, or that the thrice happy gentleman had been
made aware of his good fortune; nor even had the archdeacon been
told. But Mrs. Grantly and Lady Lufton had been closeted together
more than once, and terms had been signed and sealed between them.
Not signed on parchment, and sealed with wax, as is the case with
treaties made by kings and diplomats,--to be broken by the same; but
signed with little words, and sealed with certain pressings of the
hand,--a treaty which between two such contracting parties would be
binding enough. And by the terms of this treaty Griselda Grantly was
to become Lady Lufton.

Lady Lufton had hitherto been fortunate in her matrimonial
speculations. She had selected Sir George for her daughter, and Sir
George, with the utmost good nature, had fallen in with her views.
She had selected Fanny Monsell for Mr. Robarts, and Fanny Monsell
had not rebelled against her for a moment. There was a prestige of
success about her doings, and she felt almost confident that her dear
son Ludovic must fall in love with Griselda.

As to the lady herself, nothing, Lady Lufton thought, could be much
better than such a match for her son. Lady Lufton, I have said, was a
good churchwoman, and the archdeacon was the very type of that branch
of the Church which she venerated. The Grantlys, too, were of a good
family,--not noble, indeed; but in such matters Lady Lufton did not
want everything. She was one of those persons who, in placing their
hopes at a moderate pitch, may fairly trust to see them realized. She
would fain that her son's wife should be handsome; this she wished
for his sake, that he might be proud of his wife, and because men
love to look on beauty. But she was afraid of vivacious beauty,
of those soft, sparkling feminine charms which are spread out as
lures for all the world, soft dimples, laughing eyes, luscious lips,
conscious smiles, and easy whispers. What if her son should bring her
home a rattling, rapid-spoken, painted piece of Eve's flesh such as
this? Would not the glory and joy of her life be over, even though
such child of their first mother should have come forth to the
present day ennobled by the blood of two dozen successive British
peers?

And then, too, Griselda's money would not be useless. Lady Lufton,
with all her high-flown ideas, was not an imprudent woman. She knew
that her son had been extravagant, though she did not believe that he
had been reckless; and she was well content to think that some balsam
from the old bishop's coffers should be made to cure the slight
wounds which his early imprudence might have inflicted on the carcase
of the family property. And thus, in this way, and for these reasons,
Griselda Grantly had been chosen out from all the world to be the
future Lady Lufton.

Lord Lufton had met Griselda more than once already; had met
her before these high contracting parties had come to any terms
whatsoever, and had evidently admired her. Lord Dumbello had remained
silent one whole evening in London with ineffable disgust, because
Lord Lufton had been rather particular in his attentions; but then
Lord Dumbello's muteness was his most eloquent mode of expression.
Both Lady Hartletop and Mrs. Grantly, when they saw him, knew very
well what he meant. But that match would not exactly have suited Mrs.
Grantly's views. The Hartletop people were not in her line. They
belonged altogether to another set, being connected, as we have heard
before, with the Omnium interest--"those _horrid_ Gatherum people,"
as Lady Lufton would say to her, raising her hands and eyebrows, and
shaking her head. Lady Lufton probably thought that they ate babies
in pies during their midnight orgies at Gatherum Castle; and that
widows were kept in cells, and occasionally put on racks for the
amusement of the duke's guests.

When the Robarts's party entered the drawing-room the Grantlys were
already there, and the archdeacon's voice sounded loud and imposing
in Lucy's ears, as she heard him speaking while she was yet on the
threshold of the door.

"My dear Lady Lufton, I would believe anything on earth about
her--anything. There is nothing too outrageous for her. Had she
insisted on going there with the bishop's apron on, I should not
have been surprised." And then they all knew that the archdeacon was
talking about Mrs. Proudie, for Mrs. Proudie was his bugbear.

Lady Lufton after receiving her guests introduced Lucy to Griselda
Grantly. Miss Grantly smiled graciously, bowed slightly, and then
remarked in the lowest voice possible that it was exceedingly cold.
A low voice, we know, is an excellent thing in woman.

Lucy, who thought that she was bound to speak, said that it was cold,
but that she did not mind it when she was walking. And then Griselda
smiled again, somewhat less graciously than before, and so the
conversation ended. Miss Grantly was the elder of the two, and having
seen most of the world, should have been the best able to talk,
but perhaps she was not very anxious for a conversation with Miss
Robarts.

"So, Robarts, I hear that you have been preaching at Chaldicotes,"
said the archdeacon, still rather loudly. "I saw Sowerby the other
day, and he told me that you gave them the fag end of Mrs. Proudie's
lecture."

"It was ill-natured of Sowerby to say the fag end," said Robarts. "We
divided the matter into thirds. Harold Smith took the first part, I
the last--"

"And the lady the intervening portion. You have electrified the
county between you; but I am told that she had the best of it."

"I was so sorry that Mr. Robarts went there," said Lady Lufton, as
she walked into the dining-room leaning on the archdeacon's arm.

"I am inclined to think he could not very well have helped himself,"
said the archdeacon, who was never willing to lean heavily on a
brother parson, unless on one who had utterly and irrevocably gone
away from his side of the Church.

"Do you think not, archdeacon?"

"Why, no: Sowerby is a friend of Lufton's--"

"Not particularly," said poor Lady Lufton, in a deprecating tone.

"Well, they have been intimate; and Robarts, when he was asked to
preach at Chaldicotes, could not well refuse."

"But then he went afterwards to Gatherum Castle. Not that I am vexed
with him at all now, you understand. But it is such a dangerous
house, you know."

"So it is.--But the very fact of the duke's wishing to have a
clergyman there, should always be taken as a sign of grace, Lady
Lufton. The air was impure, no doubt; but it was less impure with
Robarts there than it would have been without him. But, gracious
heavens! what blasphemy have I been saying about impure air? Why, the
bishop was there!"

"Yes, the bishop was there," said Lady Lufton, and they both
understood each other thoroughly.

Lord Lufton took out Mrs. Grantly to dinner, and matters were so
managed that Miss Grantly sat on his other side. There was no
management apparent in this to anybody; but there she was, while
Lucy was placed between her brother and Captain Culpepper. Captain
Culpepper was a man with an enormous moustache, and a great aptitude
for slaughtering game; but as he had no other strong characteristics,
it was not probable that he would make himself very agreeable to poor
Lucy.

She had seen Lord Lufton once, for two minutes, since the day of that
walk, and then he had addressed her quite like an old friend. It had
been in the parsonage drawing-room, and Fanny had been there. Fanny
now was so well accustomed to his lordship, that she thought but
little of this, but to Lucy it had been very pleasant. He was not
forward or familiar, but kind, and gentle, and pleasant; and Lucy did
feel that she liked him.

Now, on this evening, he had hitherto hardly spoken to her; but then
she knew that there were other people in the company to whom he was
bound to speak. She was not exactly humble-minded in the usual sense
of the word; but she did recognize the fact that her position was
less important than that of other people there, and that therefore
it was probable that to a certain extent she would be overlooked.
But not the less would she have liked to occupy the seat to which
Miss Grantly had found her way. She did not want to flirt with Lord
Lufton; she was not such a fool as that; but she would have liked to
have heard the sound of his voice close to her ear, instead of that
of Captain Culpepper's knife and fork.

This was the first occasion on which she had endeavoured to dress
herself with care since her father had died; and now, sombre though
she was in her deep mourning, she did look very well.

"There is an expression about her forehead that is full of poetry,"
Fanny had said to her husband.

"Don't you turn her head, Fanny, and make her believe that she is a
beauty," Mark had answered.

"I doubt it is not so easy to turn her head, Mark. There is more in
Lucy than you imagine, and so you will find out before long." It was
thus that Mrs. Robarts prophesied about her sister-in-law. Had she
been asked she might perhaps have said that Lucy's presence would be
dangerous to the Grantly interest at Framley Court.

Lord Lufton's voice was audible enough as he went on talking to Miss
Grantly--his voice, but not his words. He talked in such a way that
there was no appearance of whispering, and yet the person to whom he
spoke, and she only, could hear what he said. Mrs. Grantly the while
conversed constantly with Lucy's brother, who sat at Lucy's left
hand. She never lacked for subjects on which to speak to a country
clergyman of the right sort, and thus Griselda was left quite
uninterrupted.

But Lucy could not but observe that Griselda herself seemed to have
very little to say,--or at any rate to say very little. Every now and
then she did open her mouth, and some word or brace of words would
fall from it. But for the most part she seemed to be content in
the fact that Lord Lufton was paying her attention. She showed no
animation, but sat there still and graceful, composed and classical,
as she always was. Lucy, who could not keep her ears from listening
or her eyes from looking, thought that had she been there she would
have endeavoured to take a more prominent part in the conversation.
But then Griselda Grantly probably knew much better than Lucy did
how to comport herself in such a situation. Perhaps it might be that
young men, such as Lord Lufton, liked to hear the sound of their own
voices.

"Immense deal of game about here," Captain Culpepper said to her
towards the end of the dinner. It was the second attempt he had made;
on the former he had asked her whether she knew any of the fellows of
the 9th.

"Is there?" said Lucy. "Oh! I saw Lord Lufton the other day with a
great armful of pheasants."

"An armful! Why we had seven cartloads the other day at Gatherum."

"Seven carts full of pheasants!" said Lucy, amazed.

"That's not so much. We had eight guns, you know. Eight guns will do
a deal of work when the game has been well got together. They manage
all that capitally at Gatherum. Been at the duke's, eh?"

Lucy had heard the Framley report as to Gatherum Castle, and said
with a sort of shudder that she had never been at that place. After
this, Captain Culpepper troubled her no further.

When the ladies had taken themselves to the drawing-room Lucy found
herself hardly better off than she had been at the dinner-table. Lady
Lufton and Mrs. Grantly got themselves on to a sofa together, and
there chatted confidentially into each other's ears. Her ladyship
had introduced Lucy and Miss Grantly, and then she naturally thought
that the young people might do very well together. Mrs. Robarts did
attempt to bring about a joint conversation, which should include the
three, and for ten minutes or so she worked hard at it. But it did
not thrive. Miss Grantly was monosyllabic, smiling, however, at every
monosyllable; and Lucy found that nothing would occur to her at that
moment worthy of being spoken. There she sat, still and motionless,
afraid to take up a book, and thinking in her heart how much happier
she would have been at home at the parsonage. She was not made for
society; she felt sure of that; and another time she would let Mark
and Fanny come to Framley Court by themselves.

And then the gentlemen came in, and there was another stir in the
room. Lady Lufton got up and bustled about; she poked the fire and
shifted the candles, spoke a few words to Dr. Grantly, whispered
something to her son, patted Lucy on the cheek, told Fanny, who was a
musician, that they would have a little music, and ended by putting
her two hands on Griselda's shoulders and telling her that the fit
of her frock was perfect. For Lady Lufton, though she did dress old
herself, as Lucy had said, delighted to see those around her neat and
pretty, jaunty and graceful.

"Dear Lady Lufton!" said Griselda, putting up her hand so as to
press the end of her ladyship's fingers. It was the first piece of
animation she had shown, and Lucy Robarts watched it all.

And then there was music. Lucy neither played nor sang; Fanny did
both, and for an amateur did both well. Griselda did not sing, but
she played; and did so in a manner that showed that neither her own
labour nor her father's money had been spared in her instruction.
Lord Lufton sang also, a little, and Captain Culpepper a very little;
so that they got up a concert among them. In the meantime the doctor
and Mark stood talking together on the rug before the fire; the two
mothers sat contented, watching the billings and the cooings of their
offspring--and Lucy sat alone, turning over the leaves of a book of
pictures. She made up her mind fully, then and there, that she was
quite unfitted by disposition for such work as this. She cared for
no one, and no one cared for her. Well, she must go through with it
now; but another time she would know better. With her own book and a
fireside she never felt herself to be miserable as she was now.

She had turned her back to the music, for she was sick of seeing
Lord Lufton watch the artistic motion of Miss Grantly's fingers, and
was sitting at a small table as far away from the piano as a long
room would permit, when she was suddenly roused from a reverie of
self-reproach by a voice close behind her: "Miss Robarts," said the
voice, "why have you cut us all?" and Lucy felt that though she heard
the words plainly, nobody else did. Lord Lufton was now speaking to
her as he had before spoken to Miss Grantly.

"I don't play, my lord," said Lucy, "nor yet sing."

"That would have made your company so much more valuable to us, for
we are terribly badly off for listeners. Perhaps you don't like
music?"

"I do like it,--sometimes very much."

"And when are the sometimes? But we shall find it all out in time. We
shall have unravelled all your mysteries, and read all your riddles,
by--when shall I say?--by the end of the winter. Shall we not?"

"I do not know that I have got any mysteries."

"Oh, but you have! It is very mysterious in you to come and sit here,
with your back to us all--"

"Oh, Lord Lufton; if I have done wrong--!" and poor Lucy almost
started from her chair, and a deep flush came across her dark cheek.

"No--no; you have done no wrong. I was only joking. It is we who have
done wrong in leaving you to yourself--you who are the greatest
stranger among us."

"I have been very well, thank you. I don't care about being left
alone. I have always been used to it."

"Ah! but we must break you of the habit. We won't allow you to make a
hermit of yourself. But the truth is, Miss Robarts, you don't know us
yet, and therefore you are not quite happy among us."

"Oh! yes, I am; you are all very good to me."

"You must let us be good to you. At any rate, you must let me be so.
You know, don't you, that Mark and I have been dear friends since we
were seven years old. His wife has been my sister's dearest friend
almost as long; and now that you are with them, you must be a dear
friend too. You won't refuse the offer; will you?"

"Oh, no," she said, quite in a whisper; and, indeed, she could hardly
raise her voice above a whisper, fearing that tears would fall from
her tell-tale eyes.

"Dr. and Mrs. Grantly will have gone in a couple of days, and then we
must get you down here. Miss Grantly is to remain for Christmas, and
you two must become bosom friends."

Lucy smiled, and tried to look pleased, but she felt that she and
Griselda Grantly could never be bosom friends--could never have
anything in common between them. She felt sure that Griselda despised
her, little, brown, plain, and unimportant as she was. She herself
could not despise Griselda in turn; indeed she could not but admire
Miss Grantly's great beauty and dignity of demeanour; but she knew
that she could never love her. It is hardly possible that the
proud-hearted should love those who despise them; and Lucy Robarts
was very proud-hearted.

"Don't you think she is very handsome?" said Lord Lufton.

"Oh, very," said Lucy. "Nobody can doubt that."

"Ludovic," said Lady Lufton--not quite approving of her son's
remaining so long at the back of Lucy's chair--"won't you give us
another song? Mrs. Robarts and Miss Grantly are still at the piano."

"I have sung away all that I knew, mother. There's Culpepper has not
had a chance yet. He has got to give us his dream--how he 'dreamt
that he dwelt in marble halls!'"

"I sang that an hour ago," said the captain, not over pleased.

"But you certainly have not told us how 'your little lovers came!'"

The captain, however, would not sing any more. And then the party was
broken up, and the Robartses went home to their parsonage.



