
THE ARABINS RETURN TO BARCHESTER.


In these days Mr. Harding was keeping his bed at the deanery, and
most of those who saw him declared that he would never again leave
it. The archdeacon had been slow to believe so, because he had
still found his father-in-law able to talk to him;--not indeed with
energy, but then Mr. Harding had never been energetic on ordinary
matters,--but with the same soft cordial interest in things which had
ever been customary with him. He had latterly been much interested
about Mr. Crawley, and would make both the archdeacon and Mrs.
Grantly tell him all that they heard, and what they thought of the
case. This of course had been before the all-important news had been
received from Mrs. Arabin. Mr. Harding was very anxious, "Firstly,"
as he said, "for the welfare of the poor man, of whom I cannot
bring myself to think ill; and then for the honour of the cloth
in Barchester." "We are as liable to have black sheep here as
elsewhere," the archdeacon replied. "But, my dear, I do not think
that the sheep is black; and we never have had black sheep in
Barchester." "Haven't we though?" said the archdeacon, thinking,
however, of sheep who were black with a different kind of blackness
from this which was now attributed to poor Mr. Crawley,--of a
blackness which was not absolute blackness to Mr. Harding's milder
eyes. The archdeacon, when he heard his father-in-law talk after this
fashion, expressed his opinion that he might live yet for years. He
was just the man to linger on, living in bed,--as indeed he had
lingered all his life out of bed. But the doctor who attended him
thought otherwise, as did also Mrs. Grantly, and as did Mrs. Baxter,
and as also did Posy. "Grandpa won't get up any more, will he?"
Posy said to Mrs. Baxter. "I hope he will, my dear; and that very
soon." "I don't think he will," said Posy, "because he said he would
never see the big fiddle again." "That comes of his being a little
melancholy like, my dear," said Mrs. Baxter.

Mrs. Grantly at this time went into Barchester almost every day, and
the archdeacon, who was very often in the city, never went there
without passing half-an-hour with the old man. These two clergymen,
essentially different in their characters and in every detail of
conduct, had been so much thrown together by circumstances that
the life of each had almost become a part of the life of the other.
Although the fact of Mr. Harding's residence at the deanery had of
late years thrown him oftener into the society of the dean than that
of his other son-in-law, yet his intimacy with the archdeacon had
been so much earlier, and his memories of the archdeacon were so much
clearer, that he depended almost more upon the rector of Plumstead,
who was absent, than he did upon the dean, whom he customarily saw
every day. It was not so with his daughters. His Nelly, as he had
used to call her, had ever been his favourite, and the circumstances
of their joint lives had been such, that they had never been further
separated than from one street of Barchester to another,--and that
only for the very short period of the married life of Mrs. Arabin's
first husband. For all that was soft and tender therefore,--which
with Mr. Harding was all in the world that was charming to him,--he
looked to his youngest daughter; but for authority and guidance and
wisdom, and for information as to what was going on in the world, he
had still turned to his son-in-law the archdeacon,--as he had done
for nearly forty years. For so long had the archdeacon been potent as
a clergyman in the diocese, and throughout the whole duration of such
potency his word had been law to Mr. Harding in most of the affairs
of life,--a law generally to be obeyed, and if sometimes to be
broken, still a law. And now, when all was so nearly over, he would
become unhappy if the archdeacon's visits were far between. Dr.
Grantly, when he found that this was so, would not allow that they
should be far between.

"He puts me so much in mind of my father," the archdeacon said to his
wife one day.

"He is not so old as your father was when he died, by many years,"
said Mrs. Grantly, "and I think one sees that difference."

"Yes;--and therefore I say that he may still live for years. My
father, when he took to his bed at last, was manifestly near his
death. The wonder with him was that he continued to live so long.
Do you not remember how the London doctor was put out because his
prophecies were not fulfilled?"

"I remember it well;--as if it were yesterday."

"And in that way there is a great difference. My father, who was
physically a much stronger man, did not succumb so easily. But the
likeness is in their characters. There is the same mild sweetness,
becoming milder and sweeter as they increased in age;--a sweetness
that never could believe much evil, but that could believe less,
and still less, as the weakness of age came on them. No amount of
evidence would induce your father to think that Mr. Crawley stole
that money." This was said of course before the telegram had come
from Venice.

"As far as that goes I agree with him," said Mrs. Grantly, who had
her own reasons for choosing to believe Mr. Crawley to be innocent.
"If your son, my dear, is to marry a man's daughter, it will be as
well that you should at least be able to say that you do not believe
that man to be a thief."

"That is neither here nor there," said the archdeacon. "A jury must
decide it."

"No jury in Barsetshire shall decide it for me," said Mrs. Grantly.

"I'm sick of Mr. Crawley, and I'm sorry I spoke of him," said the
archdeacon. "But look at Mrs. Proudie. You'll agree that she was not
the most charming woman in the world."

"She certainly was not," said Mrs. Grantly, who was anxious to
encourage her husband, if she could do so without admitting anything
which might injure herself afterwards.

"And she was at one time violently insolent to your father. And even
the bishop thought to trample upon him. Do you remember the bishop's
preaching against your father's chaunting? If I ever forget it!" And
the archdeacon slapped his closed fist against his open hand.

"Don't, dear; don't. What is the good of being violent now?"

"Paltry little fool! It will be long enough before such a chaunt as
that is heard in any English cathedral again." Then Mrs. Grantly got
up and kissed her husband, but he, somewhat negligent of the kiss,
went on with his speech. "But your father remembers nothing of it,
and if there was a single human being who shed a tear in Barchester
for that woman, I believe it was your father. And it was the same
with mine. It came to that at last, that I could not bear to speak
to him of any shortcoming as to one of his own clergymen. I might as
well have pricked him with a penknife. And yet they say men become
heartless and unfeeling as they grow old!"

"Some do, I suppose."

"Yes; the heartless and unfeeling do. As the bodily strength fails
and the power of control becomes lessened, the natural aptitude of
the man pronounces itself more clearly. I take it that that is it.
Had Mrs. Proudie lived to be a hundred and fifty, she would have
spoken spiteful lies on her deathbed." Then Mrs. Grantly told
herself that her husband, should he live to be a hundred and fifty,
would still be expressing his horror of Mrs. Proudie,--even on his
deathbed.

As soon as the letter from Mrs. Arabin had reached Plumstead, the
archdeacon and his wife arranged that they would both go together to
the deanery. There were the double tidings to be told,--those of Mr.
Crawley's assured innocence, and those also of Mrs. Arabin's instant
return. And as they went together various ideas were passing through
their minds in reference to the marriage of their son with Grace
Crawley. They were both now reconciled to it. Mrs. Grantly had long
ceased to feel any opposition to it, even though she had not seen
Grace; and the archdeacon was prepared to give way. Had he not
promised that in a certain case he would give way, and had not that
case now come to pass? He had no wish to go back from his word. But
he had a difficulty in this,--that he liked to make all the affairs
of his life matter for enjoyment, almost for triumph; but how was
he to be triumphant over this marriage, or how even was he to enjoy
it, seeing that he had opposed it so bitterly? Those posters, though
they were now pulled down, had been up on all barn ends and walls,
patent--alas, too patent--to all the world of Barsetshire! "What will
Mr. Crawley do now, do you suppose?" said Mrs. Grantly.

"What will he do?"

"Yes; must he go on at Hogglestock?"

"What else?" said the archdeacon.

"It is a pity something could not be done for him after all he has
undergone. How on earth can he be expected to live there with a
wife and family, and no private means?" To this the archdeacon made
no answer. Mrs. Grantly had spoken almost immediately upon their
quitting Plumstead, and the silence was continued till the carriage
had entered the suburbs of the city. Then Mrs. Grantly spoke again,
asking a question, with some internal trepidation, which, however,
she managed to hide from her husband. "When poor papa does go, what
shall you do about St. Ewold's?" Now, St. Ewold's was a rural parish
lying about two miles out of Barchester, the living of which was in
the gift of the archdeacon, and to which the archdeacon had presented
his father-in-law, under certain circumstances, which need not be
repeated in this last chronicle of Barsetshire. Have they not been
written in other chronicles? "When poor papa does go, what will you
do about St. Ewold's?" said Mrs. Grantly, trembling inwardly. A word
too much might, as she well knew, settle the question against Mr.
Crawley for ever. But were she to postpone the word till too late,
the question would be settled as fatally.

"I haven't thought about it," he said sharply. "I don't like thinking
of such things while the incumbent is still living." Oh, archdeacon,
archdeacon! unless that other chronicle be a false chronicle, how
hast thou forgotten thyself and thy past life! "Particularly not,
when that incumbent is your father," said the archdeacon. Mrs.
Grantly said nothing more about St. Ewold's. She would have said as
much as she had intended to say if she had succeeded in making the
archdeacon understand that St. Ewold's would be a very nice refuge
for Mr. Crawley after all the miseries which he had endured at
Hogglestock.

They learned as they entered the deanery that Mrs. Baxter had already
heard of Mrs. Arabin's return. "O yes, ma'am. Mr. Harding got a
letter hisself, and I got another,--separate; both from Venice,
ma'am. But when master is to come, nobody seems to know." Mrs. Baxter
knew that the dean had gone to Jerusalem, and was inclined to think
that from such distant bournes there was no return for any traveller.
The east is always further than the west in the estimation of the
Mrs. Baxters of the world. Had the dean gone to Canada, she would
have thought that he might come back to-morrow. But still there was
the news to be told of Mr. Crawley, and there was also joy to be
expressed at the sudden coming back of the much-wished-for mistress
of the deanery.

"It's so good of you to come both together," said Mr. Harding.

"We thought we should be too many for you," said the archdeacon.

"Too many! O dear, no. I like to have people by me; and as for
voices, and noise, and all that, the more the better. But I am weak.
I'm weak in my legs. I don't think I shall ever stand again."

"Yes, you will," said the archdeacon.

"We have brought you good news," said Mrs. Grantly.

"Is it not good news that Nelly will be home this week? You can't
understand what a joy it is to me. I used to think sometimes, at
night, that I should never see her again. That she would come back
in time was all I have had to wish for." He was lying on his back,
and as he spoke he pressed his withered hands together above the
bedclothes. They could not begin immediately to tell him of Mr.
Crawley, but as soon as his mind had turned itself away from the
thoughts of his absent daughter, Mrs. Grantly again reverted to her
news.

"We have come to tell you about Mr. Crawley, papa."

"What about him?"

"He is quite innocent."

"I knew it, my dear. I always said so. Did I not always say so,
archdeacon?"

"Indeed you did. I'll give you that credit."

"And is it all found out?" asked Mr. Harding.

"As far as he is concerned, everything is found out," said Mrs.
Grantly. "Eleanor gave him the cheque herself."

"Nelly gave it to him?"

"Yes, papa. The dean meant her to give him fifty pounds. But it seems
she got to be soft of heart and made it seventy. She had the cheque
by her, and put it into the envelope with the notes."

"Some of Stringer's people seem to have stolen the cheque from Mr.
Soames," said the archdeacon.

"O dear; I hope not."

"Somebody must have stolen it, papa."

"I had hoped not, Susan," said Mr. Harding. Both the archdeacon and
Mrs. Grantly knew that it was useless to argue with him on such a
point, and so they let that go.

Then they came to discuss Mr. Crawley's present position, and Mr.
Harding ventured to ask a question or two as to Grace's chance of
marriage. He did not often interfere in the family arrangements of
his son-in-law,--and never did so when those family arrangements
were concerned with high matters. He had hardly opened his mouth
in reference to the marriage of that August lady who was now the
Marchioness of Hartletop. And of the Lady Anne, the wife of the Rev.
Charles Grantly, who was always prodigiously civil to him, speaking
to him very loud, as though he were deaf because he was old, and
bringing him cheap presents from London of which he did not take much
heed,--of her he rarely said a word, or of her children, to either
of his daughters. But now his grandson, Henry Grantly, was going to
marry a girl of whom he felt that he might speak without impropriety.
"I suppose it will be a match; won't it, my dears?"

"Not a doubt about it," said Mrs. Grantly. Mr. Harding looked at his
son-in-law, but his son-in-law said nothing. The archdeacon did not
even frown,--but only moved himself a little uneasily in his chair.

"Dear, dear! What a comfort that must be," said the old man.

"I have not seen her yet," said Mrs. Grantly; "but the archdeacon
declares that she is all the graces rolled into one."

"I never said anything half so absurd," replied the archdeacon.

"But he really is quite in love with her, papa," said Mrs. Grantly.
"He confessed to me that he gave her a kiss, and he only saw her once
for five minutes."

"I should like to give her a kiss," said Mr. Harding.

"So you shall, papa, and I'll bring her here on purpose. As soon as
ever the thing is settled, we mean to ask her to Plumstead."

"Do you though? How nice! How happy Henry will be!"

"And if she comes--and of course she will--I'll lose no time in
bringing her over to you. Nelly must see her of course."

As they were leaving the room Mr. Harding called the archdeacon back,
and taking him by the hand, spoke one word to him in a whisper. "I
don't like to interfere," he said; "but might not Mr. Crawley have
St. Ewold's?" The archdeacon took up the old man's hand and kissed
it. Then he followed his wife out of the room, without making any
answer to Mr. Harding's question.

Three days after this Mrs. Arabin reached the deanery, and the joy at
her return was very great. "My dear, I have been sick for you," said
Mr. Harding.

"Oh, papa, I ought not to have gone."

"Nay, my dear; do not say that. Would it make me happy that you
should be a prisoner here for ever? It was only when I seemed to get
so weak that I thought about it. I felt that it must be near when
they bade me not to go to the cathedral any more."

"If I had been here, I could have gone with you, papa."

"It is better as it is. I know now that I was not fit for it. When
your sister came to me, I never thought of remonstrating. I knew then
that I had seen it for the last time."

"We need not say that yet, papa."

"I did think that when you came home we might crawl there together
some warm morning. I did think of that for a time. But it will never
be so, dear. I shall never see anything now that I do not see from
here,--and not that for long. Do not cry, Nelly. I have nothing to
regret, nothing to make me unhappy. I know how poor and weak has been
my life; but I know how rich and strong is that other life. Do not
cry, Nelly,--not till I am gone; and then not beyond measure. Why
should any one weep for those who go away full of years,--and full of
hope?"

On the day but one following the dean also reached his home. The
final arrangements of his tour, as well as those of his wife, had
been made to depend on Mr. Crawley's trial; for he also had been
hurried back by John Eames's visit to Florence. "I should have come
at once," he said to his wife, "when they wrote to ask me whether
Crawley had taken the cheque from me, had anybody then told me that
he was in actual trouble; but I had no idea then that they were
charging him with theft."

"As far as I can learn, they never really suspected him until after
your answer had come. They had been quite sure that your answer would
be in the affirmative."

"What he must have endured it is impossible to conceive. I shall go
out to him to-morrow."

"Would he not come to us?" said Mrs. Arabin.

"I doubt it. I will ask him, of course. I will ask them all here.
This about Henry and the girl may make a difference. He has resigned
the living, and some of the palace people are doing the duty."

"But he can have it again?"

"Oh, yes; he can have it again. For the matter of that, I need simply
give him back his letter. Only he is so odd,--so unlike other people!
And he has tried to live there, and has failed; and is now in debt. I
wonder whether Grantly would give him St. Ewold's?"

"I wish he would. But you must ask him. I should not dare."

As to the matter of the cheque, the dean acknowledged to his wife at
last that he had some recollection of her having told him that she
had made the sum of money up to seventy pounds. "I don't feel certain
of it now; but I think you may have done so." "I am quite sure I
could not have done it without telling you," she replied. "At any
rate you said nothing of the cheque," pleaded the dean. "I don't
suppose I did," said Mrs. Arabin. "I thought that cheques were like
any other money; but I shall know better for the future."

On the following morning the dean rode over to Hogglestock, and as he
drew near to the house of his old friend, his spirits flagged,--for
to tell the truth, he dreaded the meeting. Since the day on which he
had brought Mr. Crawley from a curacy in Cornwall into the diocese of
Barchester, his friend had been a trouble to him rather than a joy.
The trouble had been a trouble of spirit altogether,--not at all of
pocket. He would willingly have picked the Crawleys out from the
pecuniary mud into which they were ever falling, time after time,
had it been possible. For, though the dean was hardly to be called a
rich man, his lines had fallen to him not only in pleasant places,
but in easy circumstances;--and Mr. Crawley's embarrassments, though
overwhelming to him, were not so great as to have been heavy to
the dean. But in striving to do this he had always failed, had
always suffered, and had generally been rebuked. Crawley would
attempt to argue with him as to the improper allotment of Church
endowments,--declaring that he did not do so with any reference
to his own circumstances, but simply because the subject was one
naturally interesting to clergymen. And this he would do, as he was
waving off with his hand offers of immediate assistance which were
indispensable. Then there had been scenes between the dean and Mrs.
Crawley,--terribly painful,--and which had taken place in direct
disobedience to the husband's positive injunctions. "Sir," he had
once said to the dean, "I request that nothing may pass from your
hands to the hands of my wife." "Tush, tush," the dean had answered.
"I will have no tushing or pshawing on such a matter. A man's wife is
his very own, the breath of his nostril, the blood of his heart, the
rib from his body. It is for me to rule my wife, and I tell you that
I will not have it." After that the gifts had come from the hands of
Mrs. Arabin;--and then again, after that, in the direst hour of his
need, Crawley had himself come and taken money from the dean's hands!
The interview had been so painful that Arabin would hardly have been
able to count the money or to know of what it had consisted, had he
taken the notes and cheque out of the envelope in which his wife had
put them. Since that day the two had not met each other, and since
that day these new troubles had come. Arabin as yet knew but little
of the manner in which they had been borne, except that Crawley had
felt himself compelled to resign the living of Hogglestock. He knew
nothing of Mrs. Proudie's persecution, except what he gathered from
the fact of the clerical commission of which he had been informed;
but he could imagine that Mrs. Proudie would not lie easy on her
bed while a clergyman was doing duty almost under her nose, who was
guilty of the double offence of being accused of a theft, and of
having been put into his living by the dean. The dean, therefore,
as he rode on, pictured to himself his old friend in a terrible
condition. And it might be that even now that condition would hardly
have been improved. He was no longer suspected of being a thief; but
he could have no money in his pocket; and it might well be that his
sufferings would have made him almost mad.

The dean also got down and left his horse at a farm-yard,--as Grantly
had done with his carriage; and walked on first to the school. He
heard voices inside, but could not distinguish from them whether Mr.
Crawley was there or not. Slowly he opened the door, and looking
round saw that Jane Crawley was in the ascendant. Jane did not know
him at once, but told him when he had introduced himself that her
father had gone down to Hoggle End. He had started two hours ago, but
it was impossible to say when he might be back. "He sometimes stays
all day long with the brickmakers," said Jane. Her mother was at
home, and she would take the dean into the house. As she said this
she told him that her father was sometimes better and sometimes
worse. "But he has never been so very, very bad, since Henry Grantly
and mamma's cousin came and told us about the cheque." That word
Henry Grantly made the dean understand that there might yet be a ray
of sunshine among the Crawleys.

"There is papa," said Jane, as they got to the gate. Then they waited
for a few minutes till Mr. Crawley came up, very hot, wiping the
sweat from his forehead.

"Crawley," said the dean, "I cannot tell you how glad I am to see
you, and how rejoiced I am that this accusation has fallen off from
you."

"Verily the news came in time, Arabin," said the other; "but it was a
narrow pinch--a narrow pinch. Will you not enter, and see my wife?"



