
MR. CRAWLEY IS CONQUERED.


It was more than a week before the archdeacon received a reply from
Mr. Crawley, during which time the dean had been over at Hogglestock
more than once, as had also Mrs. Arabin and Lady Lufton the
younger,--and there had been letters written without end, and the
archdeacon had been nearly beside himself. "A man who pretends to
conscientious scruples of that kind is not fit to have a parish," he
had said to his wife. His wife understood what he meant, and I trust
that the reader may also understand it. In the ordinary cutting
of blocks a very fine razor is not an appropriate instrument. The
archdeacon, moreover, loved the temporalities of the Church as
temporalities. The Church was beautiful to him because one man by
interest might have a thousand a year, while another man equally
good, but without interest, could only have a hundred. And he liked
the men who had the interest a great deal better than the men who
had it not. He had been willing to admit this poor perpetual curate,
who had so long been kept out in the cold, within the pleasant
circle which was warm with ecclesiastical good things, and the man
hesitated,--because of scruples, as the dean told him! "I always
button up my pocket when I hear of scruples," the archdeacon said.

But at last Mr. Crawley condescended to accept St. Ewolds. "Reverend
and dear Sir," he said in his letter.


   For the personal benevolence of the offer made to me in
   your letter of the ---- instant, I beg to tender you my
   most grateful thanks; as also for your generous kindness
   to me, in telling me of the high praise bestowed upon me
   by a gentleman who is now no more,--whose character I
   have esteemed and whose good opinion I value. There is,
   methinks, something inexpressibly dear to me in the
   recorded praise of the dead. For the further instance
   of the friendship of the Dean of Barchester, I am also
   thankful.

   Since the receipt of your letter I have doubted much as to
   my fitness for the work you have proposed to entrust to
   me,--not from any feeling that the parish of St. Ewolds
   may be beyond my intellectual power, but because the
   latter circumstances of my life have been of a nature so
   strange and perplexing, that they have left me somewhat
   in doubt as to my own aptitude for going about among men
   without giving offence and becoming a stumbling-block.

   Nevertheless, reverend and dear sir, if after this
   confession on my part of a certain faulty demeanour with
   which I know well that I am afflicted, you are still
   willing to put the parish into my hands, I will accept the
   charge,--instigated to do so by the advice of all whom I
   have consulted on the subject; and in thus accepting it,
   I hereby pledge myself to vacate it at a month's warning,
   should I be called upon by you to do so at any period
   within the next two years. Should I be so far successful
   during those twenty-four months as to have satisfied both
   yourself and myself, I may then perhaps venture to regard
   the preferment as my own in perpetuity for life.

   I have the honour to be, reverend and dear sir,
   Your most humble and faithful servant,

   JOSIAH CRAWLEY.


"Psha!" said the archdeacon, who professed that he did not at all
like the letter. "I wonder what he would say if I sent him a month's
notice at next Michaelmas?"

"I'm sure he would go," said Mrs. Grantly.

"The more fool he," said the archdeacon.

At this time Grace was at the parsonage in a seventh heaven of
happiness. The archdeacon was never rough to her, nor did he make any
of his harsh remarks about her father in her presence. Before her St.
Ewolds was spoken of as the home that was to belong to the Crawleys
for the next twenty years. Mrs. Grantly was very loving with her,
lavishing upon her pretty presents, and words that were prettier than
the presents. Grace's life had hitherto been so destitute of those
prettinesses and softnesses, which can hardly be had without money
though money alone will not purchase them, that it seemed to her now
that the heavens rained graciousness upon her. It was not that the
archdeacon's watch, or her lover's chain, or Mrs. Grantly's locket,
or the little toy from Italy which Mrs. Arabin brought to her from
the treasures of the deanery, filled her heart with undue exultation.
It was not that she revelled in her new delights of silver and gold
and shining gems: but that the silver and gold and shining gems were
constant indications to her that things had changed, not only for
her, but for her father and mother, and brother and sister. She felt
now more sure than ever that she could not have enjoyed her love had
she accepted her lover while the disgrace of the accusation against
her father remained. But now,--having waited till that had passed
away, everything was a new happiness to her.

At last it was settled that Mr. and Mrs. Crawley were to come to
Plumstead,--and they came. It would be too long to tell now how
gradually had come about that changed state of things which made such
a visit possible. Mr. Crawley had at first declared that such a thing
was quite out of the question. If St. Ewolds was to depend upon it
St. Ewolds must be given up. And I think that it would have been
impossible for him to go direct from Hogglestock to Plumstead. But it
fell out after this wise.

Mr. Harding's curate at St. Ewolds was nominated to Hogglestock, and
the dean urged upon his friend Crawley the expediency of giving up
the house as quickly as he could do so. Gradually at this time Mr.
Crawley had been forced into a certain amount of intimacy with the
haunts of men. He had been twice or thrice at Barchester, and had
lunched with the dean. He had been at Framley for an hour or two,
and had been forced into some communication with old Mr. Thorne,
the squire of his new parish. The end of this had been that he had
at last consented to transfer himself and wife and daughter to the
deanery for a fortnight. He had preached one farewell sermon at
Hogglestock,--not, as he told his audience, as their pastor, which
he had ceased to be now for some two or three months,--but as their
old and loving friend, to whom the use of his former pulpit had been
lent, that he might express himself thus among them for the last
time. His sermon was very short, and was preached without book or
notes,--but he never once paused for a word or halted in the string
or rhythm of his discourse. The dean was there and declared to him
afterwards that he had not given him credit for such powers of
utterance. "Any man can utter out of a full heart," Crawley had
answered. "In this trumpery affair about myself, my heart is full! If
we could only have our hearts full in other matters, our utterances
thereanent would receive more attention." To all of which the dean
made no reply.

On the day after this the Crawleys took their final departure from
Hogglestock, all the brickmakers from Hoggle End having assembled
on the occasion, with a purse containing seventeen pounds seven
shillings and sixpence, which they insisted on presenting to Mr.
Crawley, and as to which there was a little difficulty. And at the
deanery they remained for a fortnight. How Mrs. Crawley, under the
guidance of Mrs. Arabin, had there so far trenched upon the revenues
of St. Ewolds as to provide for her husband and herself raiment
fitting for the worldly splendour of Plumstead, need not here be
told in detail. Suffice to say, the raiment was forthcoming, and Mr.
Crawley found himself to be the perplexed possessor of a black dress
coat, in addition to the long frock, coming nearly to his feet, which
was provided for his daily wear. Touching this garment, there had
been some discussion between the dean and the new vicar. The dean
had desired that it should be curtailed in length. The vicar had
remonstrated,--but still with something of the weakness of compliance
in his eye. Then the dean had persisted. "Surely the price of
the cloth wanted to perfect the comeliness of the garment cannot
be much," said the vicar, almost woefully. After that, the dean
relented, and the comeliness of the coat was made perfect. The new
black long frock, I think Mr. Crawley liked; but the dress coat, with
the suit complete, perplexed him sorely.

With his new coats, and something, also, of new manners, he and his
wife went over to Plumstead, leaving Jane at the deanery with Mrs.
Arabin. The dean also went to Plumstead. They arrived there not much
before dinner, and as Grace was there before them the first moments
were not so bad. Before Mr. Crawley had had time to feel himself lost
in the drawing-room, he was summoned away to prepare himself for
dinner,--for dinner, and for the coat, which at the deanery he had
been allowed to leave unworn. "I would with all my heart that I might
retire to rest," he said to his wife, when the ceremony had been
perfected.

"Do not say so. Go down and take your place with them, and speak your
mind with them,--as you so well know how. Who among them can do it so
well?"

"I have been told," said Mr. Crawley, "that you shall take a cock
which is lord of the farmyard,--the cock of all that walk,--and when
you have daubed his feathers with mud, he shall be thrashed by every
dunghill coward. I say not that I was ever the cock of the walk, but
I know that they have daubed my feathers." Then he went down among
the other poultry into the farmyard.

At dinner he was very silent, answering, however, with a sort of
graceful stateliness any word that Mrs. Grantly addressed to him. Mr.
Thorne, from Ullathorne, was there also to meet his new vicar, as was
also Mr. Thorne's very old sister, Miss Monica Thorne. And Lady Anne
Grantly was there,--she having come with the expressed intention that
the wives of the two brothers should know each other,--but with a
warmer desire, I think, of seeing Mr. Crawley, of whom the clerical
world had been talking much since some notice of the accusation
against him had become general. There were, therefore, ten or twelve
at the dinner-table, and Mr. Crawley had not made one at such a board
certainly since his marriage. All went fairly smooth with him till
the ladies left the room; for though Lady Anne, who sat at his left
hand, had perplexed him somewhat with clerical questions, he had
found that he was not called upon for much more than monosyllabic
responses. But in his heart he feared the archdeacon, and he felt
that when the ladies were gone the archdeacon would not leave him
alone in his silence.

As soon as the door was closed, the first subject mooted was that of
the Plumstead fox, which had been so basely murdered on Mr. Thorne's
ground. Mr. Thorne had confessed the iniquity, had dismissed the
murderous keeper, and all was serene. But the greater on that account
was the feasibility of discussing the question, and the archdeacon
had a good deal to say about it. Then Mr. Thorne turned to the new
vicar, and asked him whether foxes abounded in Hogglestock. Had he
been asked as to the rats or the moles, he would have known more
about it.

"Indeed, sir, I know not whether or no there be any foxes in the
parish of Hogglestock. I do not remember me that I ever saw one. It
is an animal whose habits I have not watched."

"There is an earth at Hoggle Bushes," said the major; "and I never
knew it without a litter."

"I think I know the domestic whereabouts of every fox in Plumstead,"
said the archdeacon, with an ill-natured intention of astonishing Mr.
Crawley.

"Of foxes with two legs our friend is speaking, without doubt," said
the vicar of St. Ewolds, with an attempt at grim pleasantry.

"Of them we have none at Plumstead. No,--I was speaking of the dear
old fellow with the brush. Pass the bottle, Mr. Crawley. Won't you
fill your glass?" Mr. Crawley passed the bottle, but would not fill
his glass. Then the dean, looking up slily, saw the vexation written
in the archdeacon's face. The parson whom the archdeacon feared most
of all parsons was the parson who wouldn't fill his glass.

Then the subject was changed. "I'm told that the bishop has at last
made his reappearance on his throne," said the archdeacon.

"He was in the cathedral last Sunday," said the dean.

"Does he ever mean to preach again?"

"He never did preach very often," said the dean.

"A great deal too often, from all that people say," said the
archdeacon. "I never heard him myself, and never shall, I dare say.
You have heard him, Mr. Crawley?"

"I have never had that good fortune, Mr. Archdeacon. But living as I
shall now do, so near to the city, I may perhaps be enabled to attend
the cathedral service on some holyday of the Church, which may not
require prayers in my own rural parish. I think that the clergy of
the diocese should be acquainted with the opinions, and with the
voice, and with the very manner and words of their bishop. As things
are now done, this is not possible. I could wish that there were
occasions on which a bishop might assemble his clergy, and preach to
them sermons adapted to their use."

"What do you call a bishop's charge, then?"

"It is usually in the printed form that I have received it," said Mr.
Crawley.

"I think we have quite enough of that kind of thing," said the
archdeacon.



"He is a man whose conversation is not pleasing to me," Mr. Crawley
said to his wife that night.

"Do not judge of him too quickly, Josiah," his wife said. "There
is so much of good in him! He is kind, and generous, and I think
affectionate."

"But he is of the earth, earthy. When you and the other ladies had
retired, the conversation at first fell on the habits and value
of--foxes. I have been informed that in these parts the fox is
greatly prized, as without a fox to run before the dogs, that
scampering over the country which is called hunting, and which
delights by the quickness and perhaps by the peril of the exercise,
is not relished by the riders. Of the wisdom or taste herein
displayed by the hunters of the day I say nothing. But it seemed to
me that in talking of foxes Dr. Grantly was master of his subject.
Thence the topic glided to the duties of a bishop and to questions
of preaching, as to which Dr. Grantly was not slow in offering his
opinion. But I thought that I would rather have heard him talk about
the foxes for a week together." She said nothing more to him, knowing
well how useless it was to attempt to turn him by any argument.
To her thinking the kindness of the archdeacon to them personally
demanded some indulgence in the expression, and even in the
formation, of an opinion, respecting his clerical peculiarities.

On the next day, however, Mr. Crawley, having been summoned by the
archdeacon into the library for a little private conversation, found
that he got on better with him. How the archdeacon conquered him may
perhaps be best described by a further narration of what Mr. Crawley
said to his wife. "I told him that in regard to money matters, as he
called them, I had nothing to say. I only trusted that his son was
aware that my daughter had no money, and never would have any. 'My
dear Crawley,' the archdeacon said,--for of late there seems to have
grown up in the world a habit of greater familiarity than that which
I think did prevail when last I moved much among men;--'my dear
Crawley, I have enough for both.' 'I would we stood on more equal
grounds,' I said. Then as he answered me, he rose from his chair. 'We
stand,' said he, 'on the only perfect level on which such men can
meet each other. We are both gentlemen.' 'Sir,' I said, rising also,
'from the bottom of my heart I agree with you. I could not have
spoken such words; but coming from you who are rich to me who am
poor, they are honourable to the one and comfortable to the other.'"

"And after that?"

"He took down from the shelves a volume of sermons which his father
published many years ago, and presented it to me. I have it now under
my arm. It hath the old bishop's manuscript notes, which I will study
carefully." And thus the archdeacon had hit his bird on both wings.



