
MISS DEMOLINES DESIRES TO BECOME A FINGER-POST.


John Eames had passed Mrs. Thorne in the hall of her own house almost
without noticing her as he took his departure from Lily Dale. She had
told him as plainly as words could speak that she could not bring
herself to be his wife,--and he had believed her. He had sworn to
himself that if he did not succeed now he would never ask her again.
"It would be foolish and unmanly to do so," he said to himself as he
rushed along the street towards his club. No! That romance was over.
At last there had come an end to it! "It has taken a good bit out of
me," he said, arresting his steps suddenly that he might stand still
and think of it all. "By George, yes! A man doesn't go through that
kind of thing without losing some of the caloric. I couldn't do it
again if an angel came in my way." He went to his club, and tried to
be jolly. He ordered a good dinner, and got some man to come and dine
with him. For an hour or so he held himself up, and did appear to be
jolly. But as he walked home at night, and gave himself time to think
over what had taken place with deliberation, he stopped in the gloom
of a deserted street and leaning against the rails burst into tears.
He had really loved her and she was never to be his. He had wanted
her,--and it is so painful a thing to miss what you want when you
have done your very best to obtain it! To struggle in vain always
hurts the pride; but the wound made by the vain struggle for a woman
is sorer than any other wound so made. He gnashed his teeth, and
struck the iron railings with his stick;--and then he hurried home,
swearing that he would never give another thought to Lily Dale. In
the dead of the night, thinking of it still, he asked himself whether
it would not be a fine thing to wait another ten years, and then go
to her again. In such a way would he not make himself immortal as a
lover beyond any Jacob or any Leander?

The next day he went to his office and was very grave. When Sir
Raffle complimented him on being back before his time, he simply said
that when he had accomplished that for which he had gone, he had, of
course, come back. Sir Raffle could not get a word out from him about
Mr. Crawley. He was very grave, and intent upon his work. Indeed
he was so serious that he quite afflicted Sir Raffle,--whose mock
activity felt itself to be confounded by the official zeal of his
private secretary. During the whole of that day Johnny was resolving
that there could be no cure for his malady but hard work. He would
not only work hard at the office if he remained there, but he would
take to heavy reading. He rather thought that he would go deep into
Greek and do a translation, or take up the exact sciences and make
a name for himself that way. But as he had enough for the life of a
secluded literary man without his salary, he rather thought that he
would give up his office altogether. He had a mutton chop at home
that evening, and spent his time in endeavouring to read out loud to
himself certain passages from the Iliad;--for he had bought a Homer
as he returned from his office. At nine o'clock he went, half-price,
to the Strand Theatre. How he met there his old friend Boulger and
went afterwards to "The Cock" and had a supper need not here be told
with more accurate detail.

On the evening of the next day he was bound by his appointment to go
to Porchester Terrace. In the moments of his enthusiasm about Homer
he had declared to himself that he would never go near Miss Demolines
again. Why should he? All that kind of thing was nothing to him
now. He would simply send her his compliments and say that he was
prevented by business from keeping his engagement. She, of course,
would go on writing to him for a time, but he would simply leave
her letters unanswered, and the thing, of course, would come to an
end at last. He afterwards said something to Boulger about Miss
Demolines,--but that was during the jollity of their supper,--and he
then declared that he would follow out that little game. "I don't see
why a fellow isn't to amuse himself, eh, Boulger, old boy?" Boulger
winked and grinned, and said that some amusements were dangerous. "I
don't think that there is any danger there," said Johnny. "I don't
believe she is thinking of that kind of thing herself;--not with me
at least. What she likes is the pretence of a mystery; and as it is
amusing I don't see why a fellow shouldn't indulge her." But that
determination was pronounced after two mutton chops at "The Cock,"
between one and two o'clock in the morning. On the next day he was
cooler and wiser. Greek he thought might be tedious as he discovered
that he would have to begin again from the very alphabet. He would
therefore abandon that idea. Greek was not the thing for him, but
he would take up the sanitary condition of the poor in London. A
fellow could be of some use in that way. In the meantime he would
keep his appointment with Miss Demolines, simply because it was an
appointment. A gentleman should always keep his word to a lady!

He did keep his appointment with Miss Demolines, and was with her
almost precisely at the hour she had named. She received him with a
mysterious tranquillity which almost perplexed him. He remembered,
however, that the way to enjoy the society of Miss Demolines was to
take her in all her moods with perfect seriousness, and was therefore
very tranquil himself. On the present occasion she did not rise as he
entered the room, and hardly spoke as she tendered to him the tips
of her fingers to be touched. As she said almost nothing, he said
nothing at all, but sank into a chair and stretched his legs out
comfortably before him. It had been always understood between them
that she was to bear the burden of the conversation.

"You'll have a cup of tea?" she said.

"Yes;--if you do." Then the page brought the tea, and John Eames
amused himself with swallowing three slices of very thin bread and
butter.

"None for me,--thanks," said Madalina. "I rarely eat after dinner,
and not often much then. I fancy that I should best like a world in
which there was no eating."

"A good dinner is a very good thing," said John. And then there was
again silence. He was aware that some great secret was to be told to
him during this evening, but he was much too discreet to show any
curiosity upon that subject. He sipped his tea to the end, and then,
having got up to put his cup down, stood on the rug with his back to
the fire. "Have you been out to-day?" he asked.

"Indeed I have."

"And you are tired?"

"Very tired!"

"Then perhaps I had better not keep you up."

"Your remaining will make no difference in that respect. I don't
suppose that I shall be in bed for the next four hours. But do as you
like about going."

"I am in no hurry," said Johnny. Then he sat down again, stretched
out his legs and made himself comfortable.

"I have been to see that woman," said Madalina after a pause.

"What woman?"

"Maria Clutterbuck,--as I must always call her; for I cannot bring
myself to pronounce the name of that poor wretch who was done to
death."

"He blew his brains out in delirium tremens," said Johnny.

"And what made him drink?" said Madalina with emphasis. "Never mind.
I decline altogether to speak of it. Such a scene as I have had! I
was driven at last to tell her what I thought of her. Anything so
callous, so heartless, so selfish, so stone-cold, and so childish,
I never saw before! That Maria was childish and selfish I always
knew;--but I thought there was some heart,--a vestige of heart. I
found to-day that there was none,--none. If you please we won't speak
of her any more."

"Certainly not," said Johnny.

"You need not wonder that I am tired and feverish."

"That sort of thing is fatiguing, I dare say. I don't know whether we
do not lose more than we gain by those strong emotions."

"I would rather die and go beneath the sod at once, than live without
them," said Madalina.

"It's a matter of taste," said Johnny.

"It is there that that poor wretch is so deficient. She is thinking
now, this moment, of nothing but her creature comforts. That tragedy
has not even stirred her pulses."

"If her pulses were stirred ever so, that would not make her happy."

"Happy! Who is happy? Are you happy?"

Johnny thought of Lily Dale and paused before he answered. No;
certainly he was not happy. But he was not going to talk about his
unhappiness to Miss Demolines! "Of course I am;--as jolly as a
sandboy," he said.

"Mr. Eames," said Madalina raising herself on her sofa, "if you can
not express yourself in language more suitable to the occasion and to
the scene than that, I think that you had better--"

"Hold my tongue."

"Just so;--though I should not have chosen myself to use words so
abruptly discourteous."

"What did I say;--jolly as a sandboy? There is nothing wrong in that.
What I meant was, that I think that this world is a very good sort of
world, and that a man can get along in it very well, if he minds his
_p_'s and _q_'s."

"But suppose it's a woman?"

"Easier still."

"And suppose she does not mind her _p_'s and _q_'s?"

"Women always do."

"Do they? Your knowledge of women goes as far as that, does it? Tell
me fairly;--do you think you know anything about women?" Madalina
as she asked the question, looked full into his face, and shook her
locks and smiled. When she shook her locks and smiled, there was a
certain attraction about her of which John Eames was fully sensible.
She could throw a special brightness into her eyes, which, though it
probably betokened nothing truly beyond ill-natured mischief, seemed
to convey a promise of wit and intellect.

"I don't mean to make any boast about it," said Johnny.

"I doubt whether you know anything. The pretty simplicity of your
excellent Lily Dale has sufficed for you."

"Never mind about her," said Johnny impatiently.

"I do not mind about her in the least. But an insight into that sort
of simplicity will not teach you the character of a real woman. You
cannot learn the flavour of wines by sipping sherry and water. For
myself I do not think that I am simple. I own it fairly. If you must
have simplicity, I cannot be to your taste."

"Nobody likes partridge always," said Johnny laughing.

"I understand you, sir. And though what you say is not complimentary,
I am willing to forgive that fault for its truth. I don't consider
myself to be always partridge, I can assure you. I am as changeable
as the moon."

"And as fickle?"

"I say nothing about that, sir. I leave you to find that out. It is
a man's business to discover that for himself. If you really do know
aught of women--"

"I did not say that I did."

"But if you do, you will perhaps have discovered that a woman may be
as changeable as the moon, and yet as true as the sun;--that she may
flit from flower to flower, quite unheeding while no passion exists,
but that a passion fixes her at once. Do you believe me?" Now she
looked into his eyes again, but did not smile and did not shake her
locks.

"Oh yes;--that's true enough. And when they have a lot of children,
then they become steady as milestones."

"Children!" said Madalina, getting up and walking about the room.

"They do have them you know," said Johnny.

"Do you mean to say, sir, that I should be a milestone?"

"A finger-post," said Johnny, "to show a fellow the way he ought to
go."

She walked twice across the room without speaking. Then she came and
stood opposite to him, still without speaking,--and then she walked
about again. "What could a woman better be, than a finger-post, as
you call it, with such a purpose?"

"Nothing better, of course;--though a milestone to tell a fellow his
distances, is very good."

"Psha!"

"You don't like the idea of being a milestone."

"No!"

"Then you can make up your mind to be a finger-post."

"John, shall I be a finger-post for you?" She stood and looked at him
for a moment or two, with her eyes full of love, as though she were
going to throw herself into his arms. And she would have done so, no
doubt, instantly, had he risen to his legs. As it was, after having
gazed at him for the moment with her love-laden eyes, she flung
herself on the sofa, and hid her face among the cushions.

He had felt that it was coming for the last quarter of an hour,--and
he had felt, also, that he was quite unable to help himself. He
did not believe that he should ever be reduced to marrying Miss
Demolines, but he did see plainly enough that he was getting into
trouble; and yet, for his life, he could not help himself. The moth
who flutters round the light knows that he is being burned, and yet
he cannot fly away from it. When Madalina had begun to talk to him
about women in general, and then about herself, and had told him that
such a woman as herself,--even one so liable to the disturbance of
violent emotions,--might yet be as true and honest as the sun, he
knew that he ought to get up and make his escape. He did not exactly
know how the catastrophe would come, but he was quite sure that if he
remained there he would be called upon in some way for a declaration
of his sentiments,--and that the call would be one which all his wit
would not enable him to answer with any comfort. It was very well
jesting about milestones, but every jest brought him nearer to the
precipice. He perceived that however ludicrous might be the image
which his words produced, she was clever enough in some way to turn
that image to her own purpose. He had called a woman a finger-post,
and forthwith she had offered to come to him and be finger-post to
him for life! What was he to say to her? It was clear that he must
say something. As at this moment she was sobbing violently, he could
not pass the offer by as a joke. Women will say that his answer
should have been very simple, and his escape very easy. But men will
understand that it is not easy to reject even a Miss Demolines when
she offers herself for matrimony. And, moreover,--as Johnny bethought
himself at this crisis of his fate,--Lady Demolines was no doubt at
the other side of the drawing-room door, ready to stop him, should
he attempt to run away. In the meantime the sobs on the sofa became
violent, and still more violent. He had not even yet made up his
mind what to do, when Madalina, springing to her feet, stood before
him, with her curls wildly waving and her arms extended. "Let it be
as though it were unsaid," she exclaimed. John Eames had not the
slightest objection; but, nevertheless, there was a difficulty even
in this. Were he simply to assent to this latter proposition, it
could not be but that the feminine nature of Miss Demolines would be
outraged by so uncomplimentary an acquiescence. He felt that he ought
at least to hesitate a little,--to make some pretence at closing upon
the rich offer that had been made to him; only that were he to show
any such pretence the rich offer would, no doubt, be repeated. His
Madalina had twitted him in the earlier part of their interview with
knowing nothing of the nature of women. He did know enough to feel
assured that any false step on his part now would lead him into very
serious difficulties. "Let it be as though it were unsaid! Why, oh,
why, have I betrayed myself?" exclaimed Madalina.

John now had risen from his chair, and coming up to her took her by
the arm and spoke a word. "Compose yourself," he said. He spoke in
his most affectionate voice, and he stood very close to her.

"How easy it is to bid me do that," said Madalina. "Tell the sea to
compose itself when it rages!"

"Madalina!" said he.

"Well,--what of Madalina? Madalina has lost her own respect,--for
ever."

"Do not say that."

"Oh, John,--why did you ever come here? Why? Why did we meet at
that fatal woman's house? Or, meeting so, why did we not part as
strangers? Sir, why have you come here to my mother's house day after
day, evening after evening, if--. Oh, heavens, what am I saying? I
wonder whether you will scorn me always?"

"I will never scorn you."

"And you will pardon me?"

"Madalina, there is nothing to pardon."

"And--you will love me?" Then, without waiting for any more
encouraging reply,--unable, probably, to wait a moment longer, she
sunk upon his bosom. He caught her, of course,--and at that moment
the drawing-room door was opened, and Lady Demolines entered the
chamber. John Eames detected at a glance the skirt of the old white
dressing gown which he had seen whisking away on the occasion of his
last visit at Porchester Terrace. But on the present occasion Lady
Demolines wore over it a short red opera cloak, and the cap on her
head was ornamented with coloured ribbons. "What is this," she said,
"and why am I thus disturbed?" Madalina lay motionless in Johnny's
arms, while the old woman glowered at him from under the coloured
ribbons. "Mr. Eames, what is it that I behold?" she said.

[Illustration: "What is it that I behold?"]

"Your daughter, madam, seems to be a little unwell," said Johnny.
Madalina kept her feet firm upon the ground, but did not for a moment
lose her purchase against Johnny's waistcoat. Her respirations came
very strong, but they came a good deal stronger when he mentioned the
fact that she was not so well as she might be.

"Unwell!" said Lady Demolines. And John was stricken at the moment
with a conviction that her ladyship must have passed the early years
of her life upon the stage. "You would trifle with me, sir. Beware
that you do not trifle with her,--with Madalina!"

"My mother," said Madalina; but still she did not give up her
purchase, and the voice seemed to come half from her and half from
Johnny. "Come to me, my mother." Then Lady Demolines hastened to her
daughter, and Madalina between them was gradually laid at her length
upon the sofa. The work of laying her out, however, was left almost
entirely to the stronger arm of Mr. John Eames. "Thanks, mother,"
said Madalina; but she had not as yet opened her eyes, even for an
instant. "Perhaps I had better go now," said Johnny. The old woman
looked at him with eyes which asked him whether "he didn't wish he
might get it" as plainly as though the words had been pronounced. "Of
course I'll wait if I can be of any service," said Johnny.

"I must know more of this, sir, before you leave the house," said
Lady Demolines. He saw that between them both there might probably
be a very bad quarter of an hour in store for him; but he swore to
himself that no union of dragon and tigress should extract from him
a word that could be taken as a promise of marriage.

The old woman was now kneeling by the head of the sofa, and Johnny
was standing close by her side. Suddenly Madalina opened her
eyes,--opened them very wide and gazed around her. Then slowly she
raised herself on the sofa, and turned her face first upon her mother
and then upon Johnny. "You here, mamma!" she said.

"Dearest one, I am near you. Be not afraid," said her ladyship.

"Afraid! Why should I be afraid? John! My own John! Mamma, he is my
own." And she put out her arms to him, as though calling to him to
come to her. Things were now very bad with John Eames,--so bad that
he would have given a considerable lump out of Lord De Guest's legacy
to be able to escape at once into the street. The power of a woman,
when she chooses to use it recklessly, is, for the moment, almost
unbounded.

"I hope you find yourself a little better," said John, struggling to
speak, as though he were not utterly crushed by the occasion.

Lady Demolines slowly raised herself from her knees, helping herself
with her hands against the shoulder of the sofa,--for though still
very clever, she was old and stiff,--and then offered both her hands
to Johnny. Johnny cautiously took one of them, finding himself unable
to decline them both. "My son!" she exclaimed; and before he knew
where he was the old woman had succeeded in kissing his nose and his
whiskers. "My son!" she said again.

Now the time had come for facing the dragon and the tigress in their
wrath. If they were to be faced at all, the time for facing them had
certainly arrived. I fear that John's heart sank low in his bosom
at that moment. "I don't quite understand," he said, almost in a
whisper. Madalina put out one arm towards him, and the fingers
trembled. Her lips were opened, and the white row of interior ivory
might be seen plainly; but at the present conjuncture of affairs
she spoke not a word. She spoke not a word; but her arm remained
stretched out towards him, and her fingers did not cease to tremble.

"You do not understand!" said Lady Demolines, drawing herself back,
and looking, in her short open cloak, like a knight who has donned
his cuirass, but has forgotten to put on his leg-gear. And she shook
the bright ribbons of her cap, as a knight in his wrath shakes the
crest of his helmet. "You do not understand, Mr. Eames! What is it,
sir, that you do not understand?"

"There is some misconception, I mean," said Johnny.

"Mother!" said Madalina, turning her eyes from her recreant lover to
her tender parent; trembling all over, but still keeping her hand
extended. "Mother!"

"My darling! But leave him to me, dearest. Compose yourself."

"'Twas the word that he said--this moment; before he pressed me to
his heart."

"I thought you were fainting," said Johnny.

"Sir!" And Lady Demolines, as she spoke, shook her crest, and glared
at him, and almost flew at him in her armour.

"It may be that nature has given way with me, and that I have been in
a dream," said Madalina.

"That which mine eyes saw was no dream," said Lady Demolines. "Mr.
Eames, I have given to you the sweetest name that can fall from an
old woman's lips. I have called you my son."

"Yes, you did, I know. But, as I said before, there is some mistake.
I know how proud I ought to be, and how happy, and all that kind of
thing. But--" Then there came a screech from Madalina, which would
have awakened the dead, had there been any dead in that house. The
page and the cook, however, took no notice of it, whether they were
awakened or not. And having screeched, Madalina stood erect upon the
floor, and she also glared upon her recreant lover. The dragon and
the tiger were there before him now, and he knew that it behoved him
to look to himself. As he had a battle to fight, might it not be best
to put a bold face upon it? "The truth is," said he, "that I don't
understand this kind of thing at all."

"Not understand it, sir?" said the dragon.

"Leave him to me, mother," said the tigress, shaking her head again,
but with a kind of shake differing from that which she had used
before. "This is my business, and I'll have it out for myself. If he
thinks I'm going to put up with his nonsense he's mistaken. I've been
straightforward and above board with you, Mr. Eames, and I expect to
be treated in the same way in return. Do you mean to tell my mother
that you deny that we are engaged?"

"Well; yes; I do. I'm very sorry, you know, if I seem to be
uncivil--"

"It's because I've no brother," said the tigress. "He thinks that
I have no man near me to protect me. But he shall find that I can
protect myself. John Eames, why are you treating me like this?"

"I shall consult my cousin the serjeant to-morrow," said the dragon.
"In the meantime he must remain in this house. I shall not allow the
front door to be unlocked for him."

This, I think, was the bitterest moment of all to Johnny. To be
confined all night in Lady Demolines' drawing-room would, of itself,
be an intolerable nuisance. And then the absurdity of the thing,
and the story that would go abroad! And what should he say to the
dragon's cousin the serjeant, if the serjeant should be brought upon
the field before he was able to escape from it? He did not know what
a serjeant might not do to him in such circumstances. There was one
thing no serjeant should do, and no dragon! Between them all they
should never force him to marry the tigress. At this moment Johnny
heard a tramp along the pavement, and he rushed to the window. Before
the dragon or even the tigress could arrest him, he had thrown up
the sash, and had appealed in his difficulty to the guardian of
the night. "I say, old fellow," said Johnny, "don't you stir from
that till I tell you." The policeman turned his bull's-eye upon the
window, and stood perfectly motionless. "Now, if you please, I'll say
good-night," said Johnny. But, as he spoke, he still held the open
window in his hand.

"What means this violence in my house?" said the dragon.

"Mamma, you had better let him go," said the tigress. "We shall know
where to find him."

"You will certainly be able to find me," said Johnny.

"Go," said the dragon, shaking her crest,--shaking all her armour at
him, "dastard, go!"

"Policeman," shouted Johnny, while he still held the open window in
his hand, "mind you don't stir till I come out." The bull's-eye was
shifted a little, but the policeman spoke never a word.

"I wish you good-night, Lady Demolines," said Johnny. "Good-night,
Miss Demolines." Then he left the window and made a run for the door.
But the dragon was there before him.

"Let him go, mamma," said the tigress as she closed the window. "We
shall only have a rumpus."

"That will be all," said Johnny. "There isn't the slightest use in
your trying to keep me here."

"And are we never to see you again?" said the tigress, almost
languishing again with one eye.

"Well; no. What would be the use? No man likes to be shut in, you
know."

"Go then," said the tigress; "but if you think that this is to be the
end of it, you'll find yourself wonderfully mistaken. You poor false,
drivelling creature! Lily Dale won't touch you with a pair of tongs.
It's no use your going to her."

"Go away, sir, this moment, and don't contaminate my room an instant
longer by your presence," said the dragon, who had observed through
the window that the bull's-eye was still in full force before the
house. Then John Eames withdrew, and descending into the hall made
his way in the dark to the front door. For aught he knew there might
still be treachery in regard to the lock; but his heart was comforted
as he heard the footfall of the policeman on the door-step. With much
fumbling he succeeded at last in turning the key and drawing the
bolt, and then he found himself at liberty in the street. Before he
even spoke a word to the policeman he went out into the road and
looked up at the window. He could just see the figure of the dragon's
helmet as she was closing the shutters. It was the last he ever saw
of Lady Demolines or of her daughter.

"What was it all about?" said the policeman.

"I don't know that I can just tell you," said Johnny, searching in
his pocket-book for half a sovereign which he tendered to the man.
"There was a little difficulty, and I'm obliged to you for waiting."

"There ain't nothing wrong?" said the man suspiciously, hesitating
for a moment before he accepted the coin.

"Nothing on earth. I'll wait with you, while you have the house
opened and inquire, if you wish it. The truth is somebody inside
refused to have the door opened, and I didn't want to stay there all
night."

"They're a rummy couple, if what I hear is true."

"They are a rummy couple," said Johnny.

"I suppose it's all right," said the policeman, taking the money. And
then John walked off home by himself, turning in his mind all the
circumstances of his connection with Miss Demolines. Taking his own
conduct as a whole, he was rather proud of it; but he acknowledged to
himself that it would be well that he should keep himself free from
the society of Madalinas for the future.



