
MR. CRAWLEY SPEAKS OF HIS COAT.


[Illustration]

At this time Grace had returned home from Framley. As long as the
terrible tragedy of the forthcoming trial was dragging itself on she
had been content to stay away, at her mother's bidding. It has not
been possible in these pages to tell of all the advice that had been
given to the ladies of the Crawley family in their great difficulty,
and of all the assistance that had been offered. The elder Lady
Lufton and the younger, and Mrs. Robarts had continually been in
consultation on the subject; Mrs. Grantly's opinion had been asked
and given; and even the Miss Prettymans and Mrs. Walker had found
means of expressing themselves. The communications to Mrs. Crawley
had been very frequent,--though they had not of course been allowed
to reach the ears of Mr. Crawley. What was to be done when the living
should be gone and Mr. Crawley should be in prison? Some said that he
might be there for six weeks, and some for two years. Old Lady Lufton
made anxious inquiries about Judge Medlicote, before whom it was
said that the trial would be taken. Judge Medlicote was a Dissenter,
and old Lady Lufton was in despair. When she was assured by
some liberally-disposed friend that this would certainly make no
difference, she shook her head woefully. "I don't know why we are
to have Dissenters at all," she said, "to try people who belong to
the Established Church." When she heard that Judge Medlicote would
certainly be the judge, she made up her mind that two years would be
the least of it. She would not have minded it, she said, if he had
been a Roman Catholic. And whether the punishment might be for six
weeks or for two years, what should be done with the family? Where
should they be housed? how should they be fed? What should be done
with the poor man when he came out of prison? It was a case in which
the generous, soft-hearted old Lady Lufton was almost beside herself.
"As for Grace," said young Lady Lufton, "it will be a great deal
better that we should keep her amongst us. Of course she will become
Mrs. Grantly, and it will be nicer for her that it should be so." In
those days the posters had been seen, and the flitting to Pau had
been talked of, and the Framley opinion was that Grace had better
remain at Framley till she should be carried off to Pau. There were
schemes, too, about Jane. But what was to be done for the wife? And
what was to be done for Mr. Crawley? Then came the news from Mrs.
Arabin, and all interest in Judge Medlicote was at an end.

But even now, after this great escape, what was to be done? As to
Grace, she had felt the absolute necessity of being obedient to her
friends,--with the consent of course of her mother,--during the
great tribulation of her family. Things were so bad that she had
not the heart to make them worse by giving any unnecessary trouble
as to herself. Having resolved,--and having made her mother so
understand,--that on one point she would guide herself by her own
feelings, she was contented to go hither and thither as she was
told, and to do as she was bid. Her hope was that Miss Prettyman
would allow her to go back to her teaching, but it had come to be
understood among them all that nothing was to be said on that subject
till the trial should be over. Till that time she would be passive.
But then, as I have said, had come the news from Mrs. Arabin, and
Grace, with all the others, understood that there would be no trial.
When this was known and acknowledged, she declared her purpose of
going back to Hogglestock. She would go back at once. When asked both
by Lady Lufton and by Mrs. Robarts why she was in so great a haste,
she merely said that it must be so. She was, as it were, absolved
from her passive obedience to Framley authorities by the diminution
of the family misfortunes.

Mrs. Robarts understood the feeling by which Grace was hurried away.
"Do you know why she is so obstinate?" Lady Lufton asked.

"I think I do," said Mrs. Robarts.

"And what is it?"

"Should Major Grantly renew his offer to her she is under a pledge to
accept him now."

"Of course he will renew it, and of course she will accept him."

"Just so. But she prefers that he should come for her to her own
house,--because of its poverty. If he chooses to seek her there, I
don't think she will make much difficulty." Lady Lufton demurred to
this, not however with anger, and expressed a certain amount of mild
displeasure. She did not quite see why Major Grantly should not be
allowed to come and do his love-making comfortably, where there was
a decent dinner for him to eat, and chairs and tables and sofas and
carpets. She said that she thought that something was due to Major
Grantly. She was in truth a little disappointed that she was not
allowed to have her own way, and to arrange the marriage at Framley
under her own eye. But, through it all, she appreciated Grace; and
they who knew her well and heard what she said upon the occasion,
understood that her favour was not to be withdrawn. All young women
were divided by old Lady Lufton into sheep and goats,--very white
sheep and very black goats;--and Grace was to be a sheep. Thus it
came to pass that Grace Crawley was at home when the dean visited
Hogglestock. "Mamma," she said, looking out of the window, "there is
the dean with papa at the gate."

"It was a narrow squeak--a very narrow squeak," Mr. Crawley had said
when his friend congratulated him on his escape. The dean felt at
the moment that not for many years had he heard the incumbent of
Hogglestock speak either of himself or of anything else with so
manifest an attempt at jocularity. Arabin had expected to find the
man broken down by the weight of his sorrows, and lo! at the first
moment of their first interview he himself began to ridicule them!
Crawley having thus alluded to the narrow squeak had asked his
visitor to enter the house and see his wife.

"Of course I will," said Arabin, "but I will speak just a word to you
first." Jane, who had accompanied the dean from the school, now left
them, and went into the house to her mother. "My wife cannot forgive
herself about the cheque," continued he.

"There is nothing to be forgiven," said Mr. Crawley; "nothing."

"She feels that what she did was awkward and foolish. She ought never
to have paid a cheque away in such a manner. She knows that now."

"It was given,--not paid," said Crawley; and as he spoke something
of the black cloud came back upon his face. "And I am well aware
how hard Mrs. Arabin strove to take away from the alms she bestowed
the bitterness of the sting of eleemosynary aid. If you please,
Arabin, we will not talk any more of that. I can never forget that
I have been a beggar, but I need not make my beggary the matter of
conversation. I hope the Holy Land has fulfilled your expectation?"

"It has more than done so," said the dean, bewildered by the sudden
change.

"For myself, it is, of course, impossible that I should ever
visit any scenes except those to which my immediate work may call
me,--never in this world. The new Jerusalem is still within my
reach,--if it be not forfeited by pride and obstinacy; but the old
Jerusalem I can never behold. Methinks, because it is so, I would
sooner stand with my foot on Mount Olivet, or drink a cup of water
in the village of Bethany, than visit any other spot within the
traveller's compass. The sources of the Nile, of which men now talk
so much,--I see it in the papers and reviews which the ladies at
Framley are so good as to send to my wife,--do not interest me much.
I have no ambition to climb Mont Blanc or the Matterhorn; Rome makes
my mouth water but little, nor even Athens much. I can realize
without seeing all that Athens could show me, and can fancy that the
existing truth would destroy more than it would build up. But to have
stood on Calvary!"

"We don't know where Calvary was," said the dean.

"I fancy that I should know,--should know enough," said the illogical
and unreasonable Mr. Crawley. "Is it true that you can look over
from the spot on which He stood as He came across the brow of the
hill, and see the huge stones of the Temple placed there by Solomon's
men,--as He saw them;--right across the brook Cedron, is it not?"

"It is all there, Crawley,--just as your knowledge of it tells you."

"In the privilege of seeing those places I can almost envy a man
his--money." The last word he uttered after a pause. He had been
about to say that under such temptation he could almost envy a man
his promotion; but he bethought himself that on such an occasion as
this it would be better that he should spare the dean. "And now, if
you wish it, we will go in. I fancy that I see my wife at the window,
as though she were waiting for us." So saying, he strode on along the
little path, and the dean was fain to follow him, even though he had
said so little of all that he had intended to say.

As soon as he was with Mrs. Crawley he repeated his apology about
the cheque, and found himself better able to explain himself than he
could do when alone with her husband. "Of course, it has been our
fault," he said.

"Oh, no," said Mrs. Crawley, "how can you have been in fault when
your only object was to do us good?" But, nevertheless, the dean took
the blame upon his own shoulders, or, rather upon those of his wife,
and declared himself to be responsible for all the trouble about the
cheque.

"Let it go," said Crawley, after sitting for awhile in silence; "let
it pass."

"You cannot wonder, Crawley," said the dean, "that I should have felt
myself obliged to speak of it."

"For the future it will be well that it should be forgotten," said
Crawley; "or, if not forgotten, treated as though forgotten. And now,
dean, what must I do about the living?"

"Just resume it, as though nothing had happened."

"But that may hardly be done without the bishop's authority. I speak,
of course, with deference to your higher and better information on
such subjects. My experience in the taking up and laying down of
livings has not been extended. But it seemeth to me that though it
may certainly be in your power to nominate me again to the perpetual
curacy of this parish,--presuming your patronage to be unlimited and
not to reach you in rotation only,--yet the bishop may demand to
institute again, and must so demand, unless he pleases to permit that
my letter to him shall be revoked and cancelled."

"Of course he will do anything of that kind. He must know the
circumstances as well as you and I do."

"At present they tell me that he is much afflicted by the death of
his wife, and, therefore, can hardly be expected to take immediate
action. There came here on the last Sunday one Mr. Snapper, his
lordship's chaplain."

"We all know Snapper," said the dean. "Snapper is not a bad little
fellow."

"I say nothing of his being bad, my friend, but merely mention the
fact that on Sunday morning last he performed the service in our
church. On the Sunday previous, one Mr. Thumble was here."

"We all know Thumble, too," said the dean; "or, at least, know
something about him."

"He has been a thorn in our sides," said Mrs. Crawley, unable to
restrain the expression of her dislike when Mr. Thumble's name was
mentioned.

"Nay, my dear, nay;--do not allow yourself the use of language so
strong against a brother. Our flesh at that time was somewhat prone
to fester, and little thorns made us very sore."

"He is a horrible man," said Jane, almost in a whisper; but the words
were distinctly audible by the dean.

"They need not come any more," said Arabin.

"That is where I fear we differ. I think they must come,--or some
others in their place,--till the bishop shall have expressed his
pleasure to the contrary. I have submitted myself to his lordship,
and, having done so, feel that I cannot again go up into my pulpit
till he shall have authorized me to do so. For a time, Arabin, I
combated the bishop, believing,--then and now,--that he put forth his
hand against me after a fashion which the law had not sanctioned. And
I made bold to stand in his presence and to tell him that I would not
obey him, except in things legal. But afterwards, when he proceeded
formally, through the action of a commission, I submitted myself. And
I regard myself still as being under submission."

It was impossible to shake him. Arabin remained there for more than
an hour, trying to pass on to another subject, but being constantly
brought back by Mr. Crawley himself to the fact of his own dependent
position. Nor would he condescend to supplicate the bishop. It was,
he surmised, the duty of Dr. Tempest, together with the other four
clergymen, to report to the bishop on the question of the alleged
theft; and then doubtless the bishop, when he had duly considered
the report, and,--as Mr. Crawley seemed to think was essentially
necessary,--had sufficiently recovered from the grief at his wife's
death, would, at his leisure, communicate his decision to Mr.
Crawley. Nothing could be more complete than Mr. Crawley's humility
in reference to the bishop; and he never seemed to be tired of
declaring that he had submitted himself!

And then the dean, finding it to be vain to expect to be left alone
with Mr. Crawley for a moment,--in vain also to wait for a proper
opening for that which he had to say,--rushed violently at his other
subject. "And now, Mrs. Crawley," he said, "Mrs. Arabin wishes you
all to come over to the deanery for a while and stay with us."

"Mrs. Arabin is too kind," said Mrs. Crawley, looking across at her
husband.

"We should like it of all things," said the dean, with perhaps more
of good nature than of truth. "Of course you must have been knocked
about a good deal."

"Indeed we have," said Mrs. Crawley.

"And till you are somewhat settled again, I think that the change of
scene would be good for all of you. Come, Crawley, I'll talk to you
every evening about Jerusalem for as long as you please;--and then
there will perhaps come back to us something of the pleasantness
of old days." As she heard this Mrs. Crawley's eyes became full of
tears, and she could not altogether hide them. What she had endured
during the last four months had almost broken her spirit. The burden
had at last been too heavy for her strength. "You cannot fancy,
Crawley, how often I have thought of the old days and wished that
they might return. I have found it very hard to get an opportunity of
saying so much to you; but I will say it now."

"It may hardly be as you say," said Crawley, grimly.

"You mean that the old days can never be brought back?"

"Assuredly they cannot. But it was not that that I meant. It may not
be that I and mine should transfer ourselves to your roof and sojourn
there."

"Why should you not?"

"The reasons are many, and on the face of things. The reason,
perhaps, the most on the face is to be found in my wife's gown, and
in my coat." This Mr. Crawley said very gravely, looking neither to
the right nor to the left, nor at the face of any of them, nor at his
own garment, nor at hers, but straight before him; and when he had
so spoken he said not a word further,--not going on to dilate on his
poverty as the dean expected that he would do.

"At such a time such reasons should stand for nothing," said the
dean.

"And why not now as they always do, and always must till the power
of tailors shall have waned, and the daughters of Eve shall toil and
spin no more? Like to like is true, and should be held to be true, of
all societies and of all compacts for co-operation and mutual living.
Here, where, if I may venture to say so, you and I are like to
like;--for the new gloss of your coat,"--the dean, as it happened,
had on at the moment a very old coat, his oldest coat, selected
perhaps with some view to this special visit,--"does not obtrude
itself in my household, as would the threadbare texture of mine in
yours;--I can open my mouth to you and converse with you at my ease;
you are now to me that Frank Arabin who has so often comforted me
and so often confuted me; whom I may perhaps on an occasion have
confuted--and perhaps have comforted. But were I sitting with you in
your library in Barchester, my threadbare coat would be too much for
me. I should be silent, if not sullen. I should feel the weight of
all my poverty, and the greater weight of all your wealth. For my
children, let them go. I have come to know that they will be better
away from me."

"Papa!" said Jane.

"Papa does not mean it," said Grace, coming up to him and standing
close to him.

There was silence amongst them for a few moments, and then the master
of the house shook himself,--literally shook himself, till he had
shaken off the cloud. He had taken Grace by the hand, and thrusting
out the other arm had got it round Jane's waist. "When a man has
girls, Arabin," he said, "as you have, but not big girls yet like
Grace here, of course he knows that they will fly away."

"I shall not fly away," said Jane.

"I don't know what papa means," said Grace.

Upon the whole the dean thought it the pleasantest visit he had ever
made to Hogglestock, and when he got home he told his wife that he
believed that the accusation made against Mr. Crawley had done him
good. "I could not say a word in private to her," he said, "but I
did promise that you would go and see her." On the very next day Mrs.
Arabin went over, and I think that the visit was a comfort to Mrs.
Crawley.



