
WHERE DID IT COME FROM?


When Christmas morning came no emissary from the bishop appeared at
Hogglestock to interfere with the ordinary performance of the day's
services. "I think we need fear no further disturbance," Mr. Crawley
said to his wife,--and there was no further disturbance.

On the day after his walk from Framley to Barchester, and from
Barchester back to Hogglestock, Mr. Crawley had risen not much the
worse for his labour, and had gradually given to his wife a full
account of what had taken place. "A poor weak man," he said, speaking
of the bishop. "A poor weak creature, and much to be pitied."

"I have always heard that she is a violent woman."

"Very violent, and very ignorant; and most intrusive withal."

"And you did not answer her a word?"

"At last my forbearance with her broke down, and I bade her mind her
distaff."

"What;--really? Did you say those words to her?"

"Nay; as for my exact words I cannot remember them. I was thinking
more of the words with which it might be fitting that I should answer
the bishop. But I certainly told her that she had better mind her
distaff."

"And how did she behave then?"

"I did not wait to see. The bishop had spoken, and I had replied; and
why should I tarry to behold the woman's violence? I had told him
that he was wrong in law, and that I at least would not submit to
usurped authority. There was nothing to keep me longer, and so I went
without much ceremony of leave-taking. There had been little ceremony
of greeting on their part, and there was less in the making of adieux
on mine. They had told me that I was a thief--"

"No, Josiah,--surely not so? They did not use that very word?"

"I say they did;--they did use the very word. But stop. I am wrong.
I wrong his lordship, and I crave pardon for having done so. If my
memory serve me, no expression so harsh escaped from the bishop's
mouth. He gave me, indeed, to understand more than once that the
action taken by the magistrates was tantamount to a conviction,
and that I must be guilty because they had decided that there was
evidence sufficient to justify a trial. But all that arose from my
lord's ignorance of the administration of the laws of his country.
He was very ignorant,--puzzle-pated, as you may call it,--led by the
nose by his wife, weak as water, timid, and vacillating. But he did
not wish, I think, to be insolent. It was Mrs. Proudie who told me to
my face that I was a--thief."

"May she be punished for the cruel word!" said Mrs. Crawley. "May the
remembrance that she has spoken it come, some day, heavily upon her
heart!"

"'Vengeance is mine. I will repay,' saith the Lord," answered Mr.
Crawley. "We may safely leave all that alone, and rid our minds of
such wishes, if it be possible. It is well, I think, that violent
offences, when committed, should be met by instant rebuke. To turn
the other cheek instantly to the smiter can hardly be suitable in
these days, when the hands of so many are raised to strike. But the
return blow should be given only while the smart remains. She hurt
me then; but what is it to me now, that she called me a thief to my
face? Do I not know that, all the country round, men and women are
calling me the same behind my back?"

"No, Josiah, you do not know that. They say that the thing is very
strange,--so strange that it requires a trial; but no one thinks you
have taken that which was not your own."

"I think I did. I myself think I took that which was not my own. My
poor head suffers so;--so many grievous thoughts distract me, that
I am like a child, and know not what I do." As he spoke thus he put
both hands up to his head, leaning forward as though in anxious
thought,--as though he were striving to bring his mind to bear with
accuracy upon past events. "It could not have been mine, and yet--"
Then he sat silent, and made no effort to continue his speech.

"And yet?"--said his wife, encouraging him to proceed. If she could
only learn the real truth, she thought that she might perhaps yet
save him, with assistance from their friends.

"When I said that I had gotten it from that man I must have been
mad."

"From which man, love?"

"From the man Soames,--he who accuses me. And yet, as the Lord hears
me, I thought so then. The truth is, that there are times when I
am not--sane. I am not a thief,--not before God; but I am--mad at
times." These last words he spoke very slowly, in a whisper,--without
any excitement,--indeed with a composure which was horrible to
witness. And what he said was the more terrible because she was so
well convinced of the truth of his words. Of course he was no thief.
She wanted no one to tell her that. As he himself had expressed it,
he was no thief before God, however the money might have come into
his possession. That there were times when his reason, once so
fine and clear, could not act, could not be trusted to guide him
right, she had gradually come to know with fear and trembling. But
he himself had never before hinted his own consciousness of this
calamity. Indeed he had been so unwilling to speak of himself and of
his own state, that she had been unable even to ask him a question
about the money,--lest he should suspect that she suspected him. Now
he was speaking,--but speaking with such heartrending sadness that
she could hardly urge him to go on.

"You have sometimes been ill, Josiah, as any of us may be," she said,
"and that has been the cause."

"There are different kinds of sickness. There is sickness of the
body, and sickness of the heart, and sickness of the spirit;--and
then there is sickness of the mind, the worst of all."

"With you, Josiah, it has chiefly been the first."

"With me, Mary, it has been all of them,--every one! My spirit is
broken, and my mind has not been able to keep its even tenour amidst
the ruins. But I will strive. I will strive. I will strive still. And
if God helps me, I will prevail." Then he took up his hat and cloak,
and went forth among the lanes; and on this occasion his wife was
glad that he should go alone.

This occurred a day or two before Christmas, and Mrs. Crawley during
those days said nothing more to her husband on the subject which he
had so unexpectedly discussed. She asked him no questions about the
money, or as to the possibility of his exercising his memory, nor did
she counsel him to plead that the false excuses given by him for his
possession of the cheque had been occasioned by the sad slip to which
sorrow had in those days subjected his memory and his intellect. But
the matter had always been on her mind. Might it not be her paramount
duty to do something of this at the present moment? Might it not be
that his acquittal or conviction would depend on what she might now
learn from him? It was clear to her that he was brighter in spirit
since his encounter with the Proudies than he had ever been since the
accusation had been first made against him. And she knew well that
his present mood would not be of long continuance. He would fall
again into his moody silent ways, and then the chance of learning
aught from him would be past, and perhaps, for ever.

He performed the Christmas services with nothing of special
despondency in his tone or manner, and his wife thought that she
had never heard him give the sacrament with more impressive dignity.
After the service he stood awhile at the churchyard gate, and
exchanged a word of courtesy as to the season with such of the
families of the farmers as had stayed for the Lord's supper.

"I waited at Framley for your reverence till arter six,--so I did,"
said farmer Mangle.

"I kept the road, and walked the whole way," said Mr. Crawley. "I
think I told you that I should not return to the mill. But I am not
the less obliged by your great kindness."

"Say nowt o' that," said the farmer. "No doubt I had business at the
mill,--lots to do at the mill." Nor did he think that the fib he was
telling was at all incompatible with the Holy Sacrament in which he
had just taken a part.

The Christmas dinner at the parsonage was not a repast that did much
honour to the season, but it was a better dinner than the inhabitants
of that house usually saw on the board before them. There was roast
pork and mince-pies, and a bottle of wine. As Mrs. Crawley with her
own hand put the meat upon the table, and then, as was her custom in
their house, proceeded to cut it up, she looked at her husband's face
to see whether he was scrutinizing the food with painful eye. It was
better that she should tell the truth at once than that she should
be made to tell it, in answer to a question. Everything on the table,
except the bread and potatoes, had come in a basket from Framley
Court. Pork had been sent instead of beef, because people in the
country, when they kill their pigs, do sometimes give each other
pork,--but do not exchange joints of beef, when they slay their oxen.
All this was understood by Mrs. Crawley, but she almost wished that
beef had been sent, because beef would have attracted less attention.
He said, however, nothing to the meat; but when his wife proposed to
him that he should eat a mince-pie he resented it. "The bare food,"
said he, "is bitter enough, coming as it does; but that would choke
me." She did not press it, but eat one herself, as otherwise her girl
would have been forced also to refuse the dainty.

That evening, as soon as Jane was in bed, she resolved to ask him
some further questions. "You will have a lawyer, Josiah,--will you
not?" she said.

"Why should I have a lawyer?"

"Because he will know what questions to ask, and how questions on the
other side should be answered."

"I have no questions to ask, and there is only one way in which
questions should be answered. I have no money to pay a lawyer."

"But, Josiah, in such a case as this, where your honour, and our very
life depend upon it--"

"Depend on what?"

"On your acquittal."

"I shall not be acquitted. It is as well to look it in the face at
once. Lawyer, or no lawyer, they will say that I took the money. Were
I upon the jury, trying the case myself, knowing all that I know
now,"--and as he said this he struck forth with his hands into the
air,--"I think that I should say so myself. A lawyer will do no good.
It is here. It is here." And again he put his hands up to his head.

So far she had been successful. At this moment it had in truth been
her object to induce him to speak of his own memory, and not of the
aid that a lawyer might give. The proposition of the lawyer had been
brought in to introduce the subject.

"But, Josiah,--"

"Well?"

It was very hard for her to speak. She could not bear to torment him
by any allusion to his own deficiencies. She could not endure to make
him think that she suspected him of any frailty either in intellect
or thought. Wifelike, she desired to worship him, and that he should
know that she worshipped him. But if a word might save him! "Josiah,
where did it come from?"

"Yes," said he; "yes; that is the question. Where did it come
from?"--and he turned sharp upon her, looking at her with all the
power of his eyes. "It is because I cannot tell you where it came
from that I ought to be,--either in Bedlam, as a madman, or in the
county gaol as a thief." The words were so dreadful to her that she
could not utter at the moment another syllable. "How is a man--to
think himself--fit--for a man's work, when he cannot answer his wife
such a plain question as that?" Then he paused again. "They should
take me to Bedlam at once,--at once,--at once. That would not
disgrace the children as the gaol will do."

Mrs. Crawley could ask no further questions on that evening.



